August 1st. [1861]
        Fred arrived here from Louisiana today.
        Dear Aunt Mollie sent Eddie a bottle of blackberry cordial, not having heard of his death.
        We spent the evening at Mrs. Nelson's.
August 11th. Sunday. [1861]
        The Captain and myself went to St. Peter's Church. We had a fine sermon by Bishop McGill "On Charity."
        After Church we walked round to Mr. John Purcell's for a little while returned home and read a letter from Angel. How strange things happen in this world. Concion's little girl was born on the day that my Angel Boy was buried. I felt miserable the rest of the day, in fact all the time I have felt loneliness and sadness. (Col. Burwell called to see us--
        On the 15th, Feast of the Assumption, I attended Mass at 8 O'clock.
[August] 17th. [1861]
        We received a sweet letter from Sister Sue. We both wept when we read her comforting words.
        Fred is on guard duty down at the prison.
Sunday 18th. August. [1861]
        The Captain and myself went to Church at ten O'clock. A new and Young Priest preached a pretty good Sermon but timidly and hurriedly.
        On Thursday the 22nd The Captain and myself went round to the Bishop's this morning a little while to try and get the key of the Vault, he directed us to go to the Sexton.
        In the Afternoon The Captain, Charlotte & myself went out to the cemetery, it is a desolate looking place where my babe is buried, but I hope we will soon take him home.
        In the evening Col. Beall called but we did not see him, also Dr. Jones & Mr. Linbough, the Doctor remained until eleven O'clock. I got quite tired and sleepy.
        On Friday nothing especial happened. Mrs. Myers and myself took a long walk.
Saturday 24th. August [1861]
        The Captain took me over to Petersburg. We left here at three O'clock. Cousin Tom & his nephew Mr. Adams went to the cars to meet us. We remained all the next day, Mrs. Hinton, quite a nice lady, called round for me to go to church with her. I took a nice long drive with Mr. Adams in the Afternoon. Aunt Walker came to see me, and took tea with us, she
seems to be a sterling woman.
Monday morning 26th. [Aug. 1861]
        We arose at three O'clock & left on the cars for Richmond at half past four.
        In the afternoon Capt. and Mrs. Williams took us to drive, we spent the evening there. I went round to the Office with the Captain. A soldier died at Mrs. Nelson's.
Tuesday 27th. [Aug. 1861]
        I went to see Mrs. Chilton. After Tea my Husband went to the Office. Capt. Myers, his wife and myself to Pizzini's.
Wednesday 28th. [Aug. 1861]
        We went round to our friend Mrs. Nelson's to take Tea, she gave me some yarn to nit socks for the soldiers.
Friday 30th, [Aug. 1861]
        I made two visits in the afternoon to Mrs. Purcell's and Mrs. Trent.
Saturday 31st. [Aug. 1861]
        I got up with a head ache. Mrs. Brewer and myself went to Market & bought some peaches. I was nitting nearly all day, making socks for the soldiers. In the afternoon I went to Confession to Bishop McGill. The Captain walked back from Church with me.