Friday 12th. [June, 1863]
        I came to Richmond with Dr. T. Green. The Capt. met me at the Depot. I was really glad to get back, found Cousin Celeste much improved.
        Capt. Myers arrived here from Salisbury the same evening.
Saturday 13th. [June, 1863]
        A pleasant day. I walked around to see Cousin Celeste and Jeannie.
Sunday 14th. [June, 1863]
        The Capt. went to breakfast at Mr. Menard's & remained there until 1 O'clock. I went to Church at 10--Father Hagan preached. The Capt. went out again to dine at Judge Crump's, several gentlemen were invited-- Mrs. Crump has had a mishap--In the evening Dr. Brewer walked around to see us & invited us to dine at his house the next day.
Monday 15th. June. [1863]
        We have been married four years today. I walked up to Dr. Brewer's about 12 O'clock. Capt. Myers and my Husband dined with us, we had a delicious dinner we an enjoyed it.
        In the evening Capt. Myers took Cousin Jeannie and myself to Pezzinis--
        I have had delightful news from home today, John Elliot has written to my Husband saying that Maria, my sister, was expected in San Antonio daily from Europe. It seems Father Dubuis has been made Bishop and brought her out.
        Capt. Ingraham stayed in my room during my absence, he says Mrs. Whiting expects to be confined next month.
Tuesday 16th. [June, 1863]
        I did not go out in the morning. In the afternoon the Capt. took to Mr. Menard's to see Lucy Gwinn. In the evening Capt. Myers and John Mitchell called.
  A friend sent us a little box full of splendid Strawberries which we enjoyed.
Wednesday 17th. [June, 1863]
        A warm day. I walked to see Mrs. Nelson & Cousin Celeste this morning. In the evening I went to see Mrs. Chilton and from we walked to Major Williams and took Tea. On our return Capt. Myers took us to Antonis and treated us to ice cream.
Thursday 18th. [June, 1863]
        An intensely hot day. I did not venture out at all. Capt. Myers sent me an excellent Julep about 1 O'clock.
        In the evening we had a delightful rain.
        Alcée Toutant called to see me twice, but found me out both times. Gen. Lovell also called.
Sunday 21st. [June, 1863]
        We went to early Church.
        Monday I went to Mrs. Greenhow's to spend the evening.
Tuesday 23rd. [June, 1863]
        We went out to the country to see Mrs. Randolp. We did not return until after dark--took Tea there.
Wednesday 24th. [June, 1863]
        We walked around to see Cousin Jeannie who is going to leave for
Macon this evening.
        Poor Cousin Edmund lost his little twin daughter Bettie & Robert is also at the point of death.
Thursday 25th. [June, 1863]
        It rained all day long. I received some few things from Maryland today.
Friday 26th. [June, 1863]
        A gloomy day. General Lee's Army is in Maryland.
        In the morning I walked.
        In the afternoon I made one or two visits--spent the evening at Mrs. Grant's--The Yankees have made another cavalry raid.
Sunday 28th. June. [1863]
        I went to Church at 8 O'clock-- received Holy communion. After Church and breakfast the Captain went out to Camp to quiet some Mississippi troops that became insurbordinate--
        In the afternoon we walked around to John Purcell's and remained until after Tea.
        Monday it rained nearly all day.
Tuesday 30th. June. [1863]
        Capt. and I went around to see the Bishop--
        In the evening we called around at Mrs. Nelson's.