Tuesday July 1st. 1862.
        Mr. Pulaski came in from camp and informed us that poor Mr. Abbot was killed the previous night, soon after this his body was brought to the house in an old wagon covered with straw, he was shot through the head, and of course very much disfigured. No person saw him but the gentlemen. My Husband assisted in dressing and cleaning him. Poor fellow, a nobler heart never lived, he supported his Mother, Wife and child. Little Walter is only thirteen months old. Mrs. Duval has been away during all this sad and distressing time, she went to see her Sisters who have lost their two brothers.
Wednesday 2ond. JuIy. [1862]
        Poor Mr. Abbot was buried this morning at 10 O'clock. It was pouring down raining all day long.
        Mrs. Shober from Salisbury came in to see me, she came to see after her brother's remains, Major Wheat.
        I had a letter from home, poor darling little Maria Gailbeau is dead far away from friends and home, July 3rd, 1862.
        Mrs. Col. Chilton also came in to see, she is just down from Danville.
July 4th. [1862]
        No more news from the enemy except that they are still retreating and we pursuing them.
        The fourth was not celebrated I don't expect by either side.
Dr. Brewer and Cousin Tom Adams came in to see me.
        Mrs. Duval got back home with Miss J. Abbott.
July 5th. Saturday. [1862]
        I took a walk with the Captain in the morning, in the afternoon I went to Confession to Father McMullen. I came home feeling very badly.
Sunday 6th. July. [1862]
        I felt too sick to go to Church and Holy Communion. I have an awful sick headache. I have slept nearly all day long. In the afternoon I went down stairs still feeling quite badly--Very warm.
Monday July 7th. [1862]
        I feel a good deal better this morning. The day is dreadfully hot and sultry.
July 8th. Tuesday. [1862]
        I took a walk in the afternoon, went to see Miss L. Purcell, but she was out, gone to the country. The day is exceedingly warm. I remained at home all the evening.
Wednesday July 9th. [1862]
        The day has been oppressively hot. I walked to the city spring in the evening after Tea.
Thursday 10th. [1862]
        Very warm all the morning, but we had a delightful shower by evening that cooled the atmospher--Mrs. Williams has gotten back from Charlotte, we went round to see her last night at Mrs. Nelson's.
        General Winder has left this house.
July 11th. Friday. [1862]
        A cool and pleasant day. I am still working at my tuck skirt, it will look very pretty when it is done up--
        Saturday--We moved downstairs to our old room this morning.
        Capt. Myers came in to see us, he came to the city on business.
Sunday 13th. [July, 1862]
        We went to Church at ten O'clock, we had a beautiful sermon from the Bishop on Charity. In the evening we went round to see Miss L. Purcell.
Monday 14th. [July, 1862]
        I finished my skirt. I sang in the choir this morning, practising to sing a requiem Mass for Mrs. McNulty. Mrs. Stuart played the organ.
        In the evening we went round to Mrs. Maury's and spent the evening. I also called on Miss Blake and Mrs. Anderson.
Tuesday 15th. of July. [1862]
        Today is a very hot day. I walked out to Church at eight o'clock. About 1 O'clock The Capt. came home and brought Gen Hood with him, they
took a drink and a little lunch. Capt. Myers came in also.
        We had a delightful shower in the evening--We remained at home.
        We heard that poor old General Twiggs died today in Augusta, Georgia.
Wednesday 16th. [July, 1862]
        The day is very warm--notwithstanding the shower we had last evening.
Thursday 17th. [July, 1862]
        I wrote a letter to Cousin Jeannie about getting Mrs. Abbott some Bombazine.
Friday 18th. [July, 1862]
        Cool and pleasant--
Saturday 19th. [July, 1862]
        A cool day. I called on Mrs. Thomas--We called on Mrs. Davis.
Sunday 20th. [July, 1862]
        We went to Church and heard a french priest preach an excellent sermon. In the evening we went to Mrs. Nelson's.
Monday 21st. [July, 1862]
        Mr. Niendoff and Mr. Snowdon came to see me today. Mr. N. returns to Texas tomorrow, I write to my Mother by him--
        In the evening we went to Mrs. James Purcell's.
Tuesday 22nd. July, 1862.
        Rather warm. John Elliot called to see me.
        My Husband was made a Lt. Colonel today which will date from January last. I am thinking about going to the Springs next week with Mrs. Branch.
July 27th. Sunday. [1862]
        We went to Church--Col. Chilton--Gen. Lovell & Mr. Toutant called in the evening. Alcée leave in the morning for Montgomery.
July 28th. Monday. [1862]
        The Capt. had a letter from Cousin Lawson, he and Mr. Tracy have been recommended for Brigadiers. I called on Mrs. Gen. Cooper yesterday, they seemed glad to get back to Richmond.
July 29th. [1862]
        A very warm day--Charlotte is sick since yesterday.
        I am writing a letter to my Uncle Tom. Mr. Caldwell from San Antonio is in town.
July 30th. [1862]
        I am unwell today, suffered with headache all day. We had quite a storm by night, thunder and lightning incessant.
July 31st. [1862]
        I am packing to go to the Springs tomorrow with Mr. Bulkley and Mrs. Branch.
        Poor old Dr. Curtis died this morn--and be buried tomorrow at Pacoose.