July 1861.
        The fourth was celebrated here in a very quiet way. Eddie was taken sick suddenly last night about twelve O'clock, he suffered very much, we were up with him all night. The next morning we called Dr. Brewer to see him, who stays in the house, he got better by the afternoon. Mrs. Duval was exceedingly kind, she nursed him nearly all day.
6th. [July] [1861]
        I was sick with the headache nearly all day, by night I got worse.
I am crocheting Eddie a sack the first I ever did.
Sunday 7th. [July, 1861]
        The Captain and myself went to Church, Bishop McGill preached. Edward is not very well today. After Church I wrote to my Mother.
Monday 8th. [July, 1861]
        The Bishop came to see me and inquired whether I was going out to the Amelia Springs.
        The baby is still sick.
Wednesday 10th. [July, 1861]
        Eddie was very ill all day, I packed my trunk to go to the Springs with him. In the Afternoon Mrs. Toombs and Mrs. Brown called to see me. Mrs. T. was exceedingly kind, offered to come and sit up with Eddie at night. Miss Lee and Mrs. Warrick also called.
        I sent Eddie round to the Square, he couldn't even hold his little head up.
Thursday 11th. [July, 1861]
        We had a terrible night last night. My baby was extremely ill, nauseated so much that we thought he could not possibly stand it. Mrs. Govan came up about 2 O'clock hearing him cry so pitifully. Dr. Brewer was waked up to see him, and ordered a black blister to be put on him for two hours and half, that seemed to relieve him more than anything else.
About 10 O'clock Dr. Conway was called in to see him, he told me Eddie was a very sick child but still there was nothing alarming in his symtoms.
Friday 12th. [1861]
        The baby still quite ill. Mrs. Pulaski was kind enough to ask us out to her country place. We promised to go out next week.
Sunday 14th. [ July, 1861]
        Eddie did not spend a good night, seemed to be in pain all the time, this morning I did not go to Church, stayed at home with Eddie all day.
        Mrs. Johnston & McLane called on me yesterday.
        On Thursday 18th. July The Captain had to call in Dr. Conway again, for we thought little Eddie sicker and very feeble. On Friday the darling got very low, by evening we could not warm his little feet and hands. I was all ready and packed yesterday (deed have been for the last week) to go out to the country, mountains, or in any direction that could benefit my Angel, but the Physicians objected to my going. I suppose they knew all the time that my babe was too ill.
        Friday afternoon such a change took place that I had very little or no hope of the baby's recovery.
        Mrs. Dr. Wait was kind enough to send me round her carriage. Dr. Conway was in at the time, so he told us to take Edie out to drive, it could hurt him. I went with a aching, agonizing heart, expecting every moment for my child to go off. I never shall forget that ride and that
evening as long as I live. I weeped all the time.
        That night Dr. C. ordered us to give him 20 drops of Paregoric as a last resort or remedy, to produce sleep. Mrs. Duval, who was a kind, good friend to us all during his sickness, assisted us in nursing that his last night in this world of sorrows and troubles. My own precious suffered terribly all night, he could not get any rest for more than 10 minuits at a time. I could scarcely control myself, my anxiety and pain of mind and heart were terrible.
Saturday 20th. [July, 1861]
        My own babe was gradually and quietly fading away, like a little Angel that he was, travelling to his Heavenly Home, where no pain, sickness, or sorrow will ever reach him.
        Bishop McGill came just a few moments before my babe departed, which was about three O'clock in the afternoon. The Bishop tried to comfort and console us, but it was difficult at that time of intense grief and anguish of heart. I felt as if they were tearing my soul from my body. He was layed out in the little room. Col. Chilton and watched that night. The next day he was put in the coffin, buried on Sunday afternoon, the day the Grand battle at Manassas was fought. The Bishop read the Funeral Service in the parlour, and made a beautiful address, I did not go down but the ladies told me. The parlour was crowded with ladies and gentlemen, Mrs. President Davis, Mrs. Johnston, Mrs. Wigfall, and McLean had the politeness to attend. My own was layed in the Bishop's Vault, so as to take him home with us when we return.
    That same Sunday night The Captain took me round to Mrs. Nelson's, I went stait up to bed. We spent a whole week there, with exception of one day and night that we spent at Mr. Williams'. Mrs. Nelson and all the ladies were exceedingly kind to us.
Sunday the 28th. [1861]
        We went to late Mass, I was in deep black. The Bishop gave a beautiful Sermon.
        The Southern Congress met here the day that my own darling died.