July 1st [1864]
        A very warm day. We had a delightful little shower in the evening.
        Johnny commenced to walk several days ago--and can say several words.
        We have had a pleasant time at Mr. Russell's, all are very kind to us. We expect to go to Halifax on a little trip about Tuesday the 5th. I am anxious for our cousins to see Johnny.
July 4th. [1864]
        My boy is a year old today, he can walk a little, and has said a few words. We spent his birthday at Mr. Russell's.
Tuesday 5th. [July, 1864]
        We were invited to Dr. Venable's we spent quite a pleasant day.
July 6th. Wednesday. [1864]
        We went over to Halifax--found them all well and glad to see us, they were all mighty pleased with Johnny--he was not at all well when there, was threatened with croup, one night we were up with him nearly all night.
        We remained in Halifax only about eight or nine days, as we had promised to visit Major & Mrs. Myers. On our way there we stopped to see Col. Withers family, they all treated me as as a relative right away--
        The Myers and McRories were glad to see us. We stayed with them a fortnight--returned to Mr. Russell about the 5th August. My Husband remained with me until the 12th, he then returned to Richmond to his business, suffering very much with boils.
        Mrs. Ann Williams and Col. Williams came to Mr. R. about the 19th. of August, the Col. enjoyed the country exceedingly, but was obliged to return before his furlough expired on account of his wife, who was dissatisfied. I have enjoyed Mrs. Williams company very much.
        Mrs. Nelson came up on the 9th. Sept. I only heard of the death of my sweet sister about a week before Mrs. Nelson came up. It is a great
comfort for me to know that my darling Maria died so happy and resigned to the Will of God, and cherishing such a sweet remembrance of her sister Anita.
        My Husband knew of my sister's death two months before I heard of it-- he feared I would grieve too much, and thereby injure my health.
        The Capt. came up for us on the 17th, Saturday, and we returned on the 19th. Sept. from Mr. Russell's to Richmond. Mrs. Nelson & Williams remained at Mr. Crowders.