Feb. 1st. 1864.
        The President and the Gov. both have been giving receptions for the last month--both places, I understand, have been well attended.
        Mrs. Capt. Myers Sisters came a few days since. Maria and Martha are stay on Ross Street at the Myers'.
Feb. 4th. [1864]
        Johnny was seven months old today, he cannot sit alone yet--nor has he got a single tooth--the poor little follow has taken a most wretched cold and cough & has been very restless at night.
        Susan, I am afraid, is going to have a baby before very long--
        The Capt. attended a play at Colonel Ives the other evening--Cousin Virginia and Celeste took part and acted their parts admirably well I am told. I could not go, not being very well, nor the baby well enough for me to leave him--
Feb. 8th. [1864]
        I attended a party at Mr. Sam Harrison's, it was very pleasant. We had an elegant supper. I was suffering with a bad cold then, and by the next day it was much worse--
Feb. 15th. Monday. [1864]
        Rather cold and damp we had a fall of snow. My cold is still quite bad. I have suffered a great deal with earache--a sort of neuralgia, I believe. Yesterday I was not well enough to go to Church even. Poor Colonel Wilcox died on Sunday last--Feb. 7th.--
Feb. 17th. [1864]
        Mr. Greenhow's little Samy died this morning. A bitter cold day it is. Last night the Capt. made me some strange disclosures.
February 25th. Thursday. [1864]
        A rather mild but a windy and disagreeable day--Dr. Dean came to see me this morning, he advises me to wean Johnnie and get a wet nurse if possible. I dislike it greatly, but I expect will have to do it.
        Mrs. Myers sisters are coming around to spend this evening with us.
        Johnny has cut his first two front tooth without any sickness, I am happy to say. We found them for the first time on Sunday last, the twenty first.
        I would give a great deal to see my dear Mother, and relations once more, but I fear I will not be able until after the war.