June 1st. 1861.
        We arrived in Richmond on the 2ond of the month & stopped at the Spotswood, the same place where President Davis and family stayed.
        We moved to Mrs. Duval's on 5th. We are very much pleased with the house and boarders.
    Edward walked for the first time on the 8th. of June, The Capt. and myself were exceedingly delighted to see him, he was just fourteen months and half old when he made his first attempt.
June 15th. [1861]
        The anniversary of our marriage. We were married two years today, and Eddie was christened a year ago.
        We took a ride out to the Camps yesterday to see Mrs. Rodes, but she had gone to Lynchburg.
        Mrs. Duval & her little boy went with us. Eddie looked mighty sweet and pretty with his hat trimmed with blue.
        In the evening we went round to the Exchange to see Mrs. James Purcell.
June 16th. Sunday. [1861]
        I arose this morning at half past five and took a bath. Mrs. Purcell came round for me to go to Church with her.
June 18. [1861]
        Mrs. McLean and Mr. Blake came to see Mrs. Mac is staying with Mrs. President Davis at the Spotswood.
        On Friday the 21st. I went round to see Mrs. Col Myers. I have been suffering with headache for two days.
        Mr. Linburg and Mr. Calvert called in the evening late, and stayed
for about two hours. I felt quite tired and sleepy.
        This was the hottest and most oppressive night I ever felt, we could not go to sleep for a long time. Eddie was very restless. About three O'clock a terrible storm came up, I became very much frightened. I thought we were all going to be destroyed. The house shook awfully.
June 22ond. Saturday. [1861]
        Edward was 15 months old today, he is better now than I have seen him for months, he has another tooth nearly through.
Sunday 23rd. [1861]
        I arose this morning at half past five, took a bath, and went to Church at half past six. I felt so very weak that I thought I would certainly faint. Last night Captain Jones came 15 miles Just to see the Captain, he went to see Mrs. Davis.