April 1st. 1865.
        Saturday--A pleasant day. I exchanged nurses, I got Mary Heane from the sisters of Charity.
        The 2ond. Sunday we went to Church, the Capt. went to Mr. Grant's farm afterwards. About two o'clock in the day Mr. Myers came around to Mrs. Nelson to inform the Capt. that Richmond was to be evacuated that afternoon.
        Gen. Lee telegraphed Mr. Davis that the Yankees had broken through his lines in two different places and he feared would be compelled to give
up Richmond & Petersburg.
        My Husband did not return from the country until about 5 1/2, he left me about seven & half.
        The President, Cabinet and all the officers belonging to the different departments started on the Cars for Danville, Va. expecting to remain some there and defend that country. My Husband sometimes advised me to go to North Carolina or some other part of the Confederacy, but I refused, believing it best to remain in Richmond, thinking it would be the easiest way I could reach my home.
        I never spent two such nights in my life as I did the one of the evacuation and the one following, such fright, anxiety and dread I never before experienced. I felt sick for a week afterwards.
April 3rd. [1865]
        The Yankees came into Richmond about nine O'clock in the morning. I moved up to Mr. Myer Myers the same day, they were all exceedingly kind to me, particularly Mr. Sol Myers. The Benjamins & The Crenshaws also invited me to stay with them. Mrs. Houseright stayed at the B. for some time.
        My friends were all very kind in coming to see me. Mr. L. Crenshaw proved to be a good friend of ours.
        Gen. Lee surrendered his army on the ninth of April, we southerners could scarcely believe it possible.
        I heard from my dear Husband only once after we parted in Rich-- he tells me to go home as soon as practicable. I started three weeks after
he evacuation. Mr. G. T. Williams was my escort as far as New York, he was very attentive. We reached the city of N. York the very day that President Lincoln's remains passed through the city, the place seemed gayer and more crowded than ever. I saw Mr. & Mrs. Roumage several times.
        I remained in New Orleans two weeks waiting to see if they would allow me to go by Galveston,--through the kindness of Gen'l Wilcox and Judge Hancock I succeeded in getting permission.
        I remained in Houston about ten days waiting for my brother to come for me. I stayed at the McGreal's, they were very kind to me.