June, Wednesday 1, 1864
        Tate had me awakened at daylight this morning - they had some trouble and confusion before we started. I drove my Spring wagon, with Tate, Bettie, Robert and Nannie as passengers. Helen rode horseback on old McGruder - Uncle Elam, Willie Perkins and Peter with the baggage went in the Wagon. We traveled very slow, arrived at Col. Perkins half past ten, with no accident, and a very pleasant trip, Mr. Read's wagon had been waiting since daylight for them, so as quick as the baggage could be changed they started on for Dixie, and I hope are safe in Confederate lines tonight. Nannie and Harison stoped at Mr. Reid's in Hernando last night, left at daylight. God forever protect her from the tyranny of her Mother and the Yankees, 'tis an awful step, but I trust it is right - Mr. Wilson came to Col. Perkins some time after they had left, was very much disapointed at not seeing them, he, Mr.
Crawford, the children and I spent a very pleasant day. Mr. Wilson came some of the way with us, we had an awful time from Horn Lake in a thunder storm, arrived at home, found Father composed & satisfied. We all spent eve in the Parlor - Laura and I all alone.



June, Thursday 2, 1864
        I slept late this morning. Laura brought me a cup of Coffee to my room, which I enjoyed. We had a very quiet day, after the great excitement of the two days just passed - very cloudy & showery. I have made me a nice traveling sun-bonnet, and began my white swiss waiste - did not get very much done to it. Not one word from Hal yet, think very strange, as she was almost sure of coming yesterday morning. Joanna will go over tomorrow to see what is to pay - Anna Bradinaz came over this evening for Miss Tollison to see when we were going. Sallie Hildebrand came to get me to take her Brothers, in Jackson's Cavalry, some things. Mr. Wilson and Mr. Rutland were here this morning, no late news, did not come in the house, as we are in constant dread of another raide from the Yankees - Aunt Patsy, Father, Joanna, Sister Mary and I spent the eve together discussing passing events of our household - Frank and Sallie retired early - now Laura, Tippie Dora and I all alone -



June, Friday 3, 1864
        Laura awakened me this morning at daylight. Mr. Wilson came to breakfast - had no later news than yesterday. We have everything to be thankful for, our Armys have, by the grace of God, been victorious so far. Mr. W. did not stay long after breakfast, will return tomorrow -
 Joanna went over Nonconnah today. Hal has not been able to get a horse yet, but expects to be along tomorrow. I hope she may, for Father is so anxious for us to get off, did not hear any news from that direction. This has indeed been a gloomy day - cloudy and raining all day - Father spent the day in his big chair reading "Small house at Allington." Aunt Patsy, Sister Mary & I spent the day in Tate's room - I have almost finished my white swiss body. Sallie and Frank have been caged today, and right noisy. I wrote a letter for Marguerite after tea to her Mother in Holly Springs - the rest all in the Parlor. Laura and I alone except Tippe Dora who is nodding. I expect this is the last quiet night we will have for some time to come.



June, Saturday 4, 1864
        This day has seemed like a month to me. I got up early and went to work to finish my white waiste , did not sew long before Hal came, on her way down to Dixie, we have been disapointed in getting Dr. Buntin to go with us, and Johnnie Armstrong is to be our escort to Pontotoc. Mrs. Wren will be with us to Senatobia. Mr. Seymour came this far with them, but returned to Memphis. Mr. Wilson came while they were here, did not have any late news, however we are confident of success, they are glorying over their victories from all points, yet say nothing with regard to the price of Gold. We had to disapoint Miss Tollison, Mr. Wilson carried the news. Hal and I each have a Spring wagon with our old Greys - I finished my waiste , my lunch fixed, and I believe everything is ready to leave now. We all sat in the Parlor after Tea - Father enjoyed the music very much. Sister Mary finished Helen's Bridal Gown, came out to the room with it to
pack. Hal is asleep, Laura, Tippie Dora and I awake, I am very sad in thinking it is the last night in some time -



June, Sunday 5, 1864
        This day has seemed a week to me - We had a very late start from home, Hal was first to wake, the sun was shining then, Laura sound asleep. After some delay we had breakfast, bid all the servants and home folks good bye and got off at 8 o'clock, poor Laura was greatly distressed. God guide her, and protect her from all harm - bless my poor old Father, and save him from such excitement as we are always exposed to - he came by Mr. Hudghins and got Hal's things for her, met us at the burnt chimneys, came with us over Horn Lake Creek, to see us safe, then went on back to go to Church. Oh! how my heart ached to see my poor hoary headed Parent leave me. Oh! God have mercy, have mercy - We did not get to Mr. Boyd's until 12 o'clock, rested about one hour, have traveled very slow all evening. Mr. Wilson is with us, we ate dinner at hurricane creek - have stoped for the night at Mr. Dennis's, four miles below Hernando, a very nice place, and our horses well cared for. Sat up until 10 o'clock, very tired, and will certainly appreciate the nice, clean bed. God bless my Father's household -



June, Monday 6, 1864
        After all of our agreements &c about an early start, we did not get off until 8 o'clock, a terible , terible day we have ahd. Cold Water almost out of it's banks, and still rising - the slews swiming - Mr. Wilson picked the way or we never would have gotten through. Arrived at Cold Water Station
in time to eat our dinner and feed. Met with a Negro man, coming to Senatobia, gave him part of our baggage, had to go twenty miles out of the way, by Luxahoma to cross Hickey Hayley - We missed the road to Mrs. Wren's home, had to travel until 8 o'clock, through Senatobia bottom after night, oh, how terible to think of. We never would have reached here had it not been for Mr. Wilson's kindness - found old Mrs. Arnold ready to receive is, where we are all now ensconsed , Mrs. Wren fast asleep - Hal taking Chloroform. I beged her not to, but to no availe - I am all alone. Mr. Wilson and John both retired. We have glorious news from Va. Gen. Lee has repulsed Grant, with heavy loss. God grant it may be so. Traveled two days and only 30 miles from home. God bless my poor old Father, and his household.



June, Tuesday 7, 1864
        As usual, we had a very late start, a very nice drive to Mr. Wallace's - arrived about ten o'clock, found all home folks there, Bro. Geo. and John Titus came for them in two Ambulances. Robie and Mamie both well, poor little Rob, I have been grieved ever since I passed them, haveing caressed Mamie and not him, I will make up when we meet again - they expect to leave tomorrow or next day. We have had few adventures in our travels today, rough roads. Mr. Wilson has been extremely kind - We had some difficulty in passing over Talehatchie - the ferry boat had washed away, and we had a bad affair to get over in. We are staying in Panola tonight with Mrs. Dr. Philips, a friend of Hal's - she is very kind, and we were very fortunate in getting in. A very hard rain after we got here. Mr. Wilson went to Mrs. Moore to stay tonight. We have all made arrangements to start very
early in the morning, however I ought not to record our daylight starts - Hal is suffering with tooth ache, has taken an opiate and sound asleep. God bless all at home, my precious old Father, and Brothers far away.



June, Wednesday 8, 1864
        I think today will be long remembered, a hard rain before breakfast, Mr. Rodgers arrived just after, and had almost pursuaded us to remain over until tomorrow, when Mr. Wilson came up and said it was impossible for him to remain, of course we could never venture without him, so we packed up and left at 8 o'clock. I never traveled such roads in my life - creeks swimming, as we neared the City of Springport, in passing a school house, with the children at play, I greeted them with school, butter, when all hands joined, and I thought for a while Mr. Wilson had a skirmish on hand, we compromised however, when old Grey refused to pull up the hill and Mr. W. had to come to our relief - We ate dinner there, which was broken up by the hardest rain I ever was exposed to, we left the scene in disgust, and demoralized, had a terible time, almost swam clear creek - a rain and night coming on. We stoped 8 miles this side of Oxford at Mr. Bunch's, where Hal, Johnny & I are now enjoying the quiet of a room, still raining. I never laughed as much as when I awoke and saw Hal's face swolen , completely disfigured, relieved however. Mr. W. left early with a book to read - after all the trouble we have had a nice time.



June, Thursday 9, 1864
        A bright and beautiful day, yet the roads very heavy, 8 miles from Oxford, hills all the way, left quite early - were very fortunate in getting
to the place we did - Mr. Wilson with his usual kindness, assisted us greatly, in fact we would never have succeeded in getting through had it not been for him. We arrived in Oxford about 10 o'clock, stoped at the University, where Henderson's Scouts were camped, and put Mr. W. bundles out, he very kindly sent two Servants with us to take our baggage, and carry our horses back to Camp, indeed I do not know how Hal and I can ever repay him for his kindness to us during this trip. Lieut. Carman & Mr. Bacon came to the Wagon to see us, and get the late papers. Mr. & Mrs. Barr were very glad to see us, and have treated us as kind as our own relations. Mr. Wilson came round to see us this evening, we had a very pleasant time. John went to Camp with him. Mr. & Mrs. Barr, Emma, Hal & I spent the eve'ing alone. Hal & I slept all afternoon -



June, Friday 10, 1864
        We have spent a delightful day, did not get up in time for breakfast, Mrs. Barr sent it to the room. After breakfast I cut, of a piece of Calico I had, Emma a dress, and two Soldier shirts - did not sew any. Mr. Wilson came this morning - Mr. Cummins also, the latter staid to dinner. Mr. Barr and all hands have been buisy trying to get us a Wagon, have not succeeded as yet. Wrote to Father this evening, and fixed a bundle of late Southern papers to send him by Johnie. We had just dressed to walk out to the University when Mrs. Goodman and Capt. Scales came, Mr. Wilson & Mr. Cummins also. We spent a delightful evening, but I always feel how sadly changed, how demoralized we are on the border when thrown in any society. Mrs. Goodman is highly accomplished - I like her very much. Charlotte Ingram came over after tea, we spent a very pleasant evening. I think though she is too affected. No news from Tate, or any of the party yet. Hal & I
have a delightful place to stay, and are content to await their arrival. Mr. & Mrs. Barr are very kind to us.



June, Saturday 11, 1864
        Hal and I ready for breakfast, Mr. Wilson and John came while we were eating for us to go out to the University, we had to waite some time for Mr. Cummins. Lt. McConnell, who has just returned from Helena with a Flag of Truce came to see us, I was very glad to see him - did not stay very long, before we had to start to fulfill our engagement. Mrs. Hilgard gave us some delightful Music, the Labratory , Librarys &c. were a great treat. Capt. Scales accompanyed us, also Lt. McConnell. Mr. Wilson & Mr. Cummins staid to dinner with us, left soon after. Hal & I went round to call on Mrs. Goodman, met with Capt. Scales, & Mrs. Toomy there, spent a delightful evening. Hal went to bed soon after supper - poor Hal, she is so easily discouraged, and has the blues tonight. Mr. Barr and I sat up quite late, had a very pleasant time, although the rest had all retired. I found Hal non talkative , and rather cross, when I arrived in my room.
        Good news from Forrest, he has captured the Wagon train, and completely routed the raide , which left Memphis two weeks ago. God bless our dear Soldiers and my poor old Father.



June, Sunday 12, 1864
        Our news from the front today is glorious, Forrest's victory is complete, captured 250 wagons, the Yankees in full retreat, Bell's brigade close on the rear, capturing straglers by the hundreds. Willie Pope, ad't of 7th.
Tenn. & Capt. Tate of same, both killed - no other casualties mentioned. Raining all day, no Church. Hal has had the blues all day, we both had a long nap before dinner. I have spent most of the day reading, - Lay of the last Nibelungers, - which was loaned me from the University Library - Emma & I alone in Parlor when Mr. Wilson came, spent the evening - just at dark Helen and Nannie came riding up. John & Lt. McConnell with them, they stoped at Mrs. Barr's. John returned to Camp with Lt. McC - after tea Mr. Wilson and John came over. We all have had a delightful evening. Lt. McConnell & Capt. Wormely came late - they all staid very late, 12 o'clock. We had a nice lunch after we came to our room. Nannie and Helen are sleeping on a pallet. Mrs. Barr is so kind - we think of going on tomorrow - oh! 'tis so happy to be in Dixie. Poor Father, I wish he had all the good news tonight. God bless him. Tate & Bro. Geo. broke down in Panola.


June, Tuesday 14, 1864
        We had a little sleep last night. Helen & Nannie fixed their pallets in the corner - Hal and I were just in front of the fire, an India rubber blanket to lie on, a shawl for our pillow, with only a light mantle for covering, we did not spend a very delightful night. John sat up in the corner and nod'ed - we all were up before daylight, our old store proved more comfortable than the open air. Our poor horses did not have a mouthful, we had no breakfast. Started on our journey at daylight, had a rough, disagreeable trip to Pontotoc, distance 15 miles, which we accomplished by 11 o'clock. Came by Mrs. Duke's and left Hal by the College and got Willie & Andrew. Met Bro. Will five miles from town. Mary, Eliza and all were


delighted to see us - we had a splendid dinner, slept all afternoon. Tate and Bro. George arrived before sundown, came from Oxford today. Mary, Nannie and I slept together, Helen, Mary K, Bettie and Ann on pallets. It is delightful and seems like home for us all to be together -



June, Wednesday 15, 1864
        All up and ready for breakfast - Jim started for Oxford early. I wrote to Lt. McConnell by him - John left for Tupelo, came back this evening.
        Forrest's troops which have just achieved such a victory are at Guntown, will be in Tupelo in a day or two. Forrest himself was there. Such sad news - our brave and Christian Gen. Leonidas Polk, was killed yesterday morning at 10 o'clock by a cannon ball, a stray shot, in a skirmish. Oh! God have mercy on our Southern land, drive the wicked foe from our soile , and we humbly pray for thy mercy and peace. So many of our bravest and best have fallen - bless and protect my dear Bros and return them safe to my poor old Father.
        We have all spent the day at home. Bettie took Mary & Robert visiting. Hal, Linn, Mary Martin, & Capt. Duke called this morning. Aunt Mary Gordon, Cousin Ginnie, Mrs. Clardy & little Annie called this evening. We have spent a delightful day. God bless my dear Father and his household - protect my dear Bros -



June, Thursday 16, 1864
        Late risers this morning, but all ready for breakfast. John and Andrew went over to town after breakfast to get the Ambulances, we all spent the day with Aunt Mary Gordon, and a delightful time we had, her home
is as beautiful as ever. Cousin Ginnie is so lovely, has a sweet little girl, Annie. I don't know which enjoyed the visit most, the Children or grown ones. I carried a Soldier's shirt to make, but did not get much done. Music and conversation the order of the day. Cousin Ginnie has a splendid piano. We had a hard rain and wind strom this eve, which delayed our return home rather late, arrived all safe and sound. After tea we all retired to our rooms, rather fatigued. No news from the Army today - and no news from home since we left. God grant that poor old Father's life may be quiet, and spare him to meet his children once more. God bless my Bros, and Oh! my savior bless our Armys and crown them with victory.



June, Friday 17, 1864
        A stupid and unhappy day for me - the rest have all enjoyed it. I was in a sad mood, sat in the Parlor alone, sewing most of the time, made a Soldier's shirt, none in particular, after finishing it, read three or four chapters in Macario, an delighted with it, there is one character in which I find much sympathy, will not mention until I live through it. I was never so oppressed in my feelings as in the last few days, I cannot define it, yet I feel I cannot rush quick enough to meet my fate, with a knowledge I will shudder when it overtakes me. God have mercy on my poor weary spirit, give me strength and patience to calmly see thy will not mine be done. Our news is not cheering today, oh! God we have suffered, we have endured patiently thy chastenings, if it can please the, crown our two Armys now in action, with glorious victory, let thy smile brighten the
Sunny South with peace, soften the hearts of our enemies, and oh! bless my dear Father and Brothers -



June, Saturday 18, 1864
        Rather an eventful and pleasant day, we made preperations early for a visit to Mrs. Duke, but Bro. George is always slow, and did not go for the Ambulance until late. We were all very much surprised to see Lt. McConnell drive in it when it did arrive, we were delighted to see him, he drove us to where the prisoners were he was gaurding , at the barber's shop. Bro. George then took his seat. Mr. Wilson was with him, we were delighted to see him, had on his new Uniform, they did look so nice. Two detectives were the prisoners, one I have seen up on the lines, they all stoped at Mrs. Duke's on the way out, to Tupelo. Lt. McConnell, Mr. Wilson and Capt. Wimberly came in, did not stay long, John arrived from Tupelo, news Dashiell Perkins wounded, killed the Yankees who shot him, and saved his colors. John Harris & Joe Park killed, how sad - Capt. Henderson wounded. Tate, Bro. Geo. Nannie, Bettie and the children all went out to Aunt Mary Gordon's this eve. Hal, Capt. Duke and Miss Miller were to see us.



June, Sunday 19, 1864
        A delightful day we have had, although it is Sunday. Jim, Decatur and John went over to see Hal this morning, Nannie came in with John Duke and went to Church, returned and spent the day with us. Robert came over and spent the day also - the boys came back to Dinner and we all had a gay time. Mr. Wilson came over after dinner, he and Helen went out to Aunt
Mary's to tea, Jim and Decatur went out to see Tate, but returned to Tea. John, Decatur, and Jim all left for Tupelo about 9 o'clock, a beautiful Moonlight for their trip. Mr. Wilson staid very late, 12 o'clock, he, Helen, Mary and I sat out in the moonlight and enjoyed it very much, he leaves at daylight for Oxford. Lt. McC. did not return from Tupelo. We are hourly expecting Maj. Crump & Eddie. Wrote home today, sent letter by Mr. Wilson, I hope to hear from home before leaving for Ga. God smile upon our Sunny land, bless my dear Father and Bros.



June, Monday 20, 1864
        Mary, Helen and I were up bright and early, waiting breakfast for Bro Will, for fear he would lecture us about sitting up so late. Capt. Duke brought Hal around early, I made the skirt to my Grenadine, Helen and Hal took a nap. Bro Will came to dinner and told us of another Yankee raide coming out of Memphis, after Forrest, of course we have no fears for our success - but poor, brave boys, how much they must suffer. No news from Maj. Crump or Eddie yet. Kate Herron & Valley Huntington called. Bro. Geo. Tate, Cousin Ginnie & the children came over this evening, did not stay long. Helen & Capt. Duke went riding this evening, Hal staid until very late. I have been reading Miss Evens last book - Macario - I like it very much, though not entirely satisfied with the fate of some of the Characters, have not finished it yet. We all chated for some time on the Porch after Tea - Bettie is sewing, has one of Tate's candles, so I have an opportunity of reading again -
June, Tuesday 21, 1864
        I was up early this morning, waited for Capt. Duke some time before he arrived - we started, did not go far before we had to run in to Mrs. Martin's out of a hard rain. I was mortified, for I had not called on Mollie, we staid about an hour, and spent it very pleasantly. Arrived at Mrs. Duke's, Hal cut my dress for me, fited it, and help baiste . I never have any one to take an interest or help me with my sewing, and fully appreciate Hal's kindness. It has been rainy and gloomy all day, no chance for outdoor enjoyment, so Tate and I against Hal and Capt. Duke, spent the evening playing Euchre - Lt. McConnell arrived from Tupelo about dark, unfortunate with his prisoners, they having made their escape the night before. Capt. Duke & I, vs Hal and Lt. Mc. had a nice game of Euchre -



June, Wednesday 22, 1864
        I came home as soon as I ate my breakfast. Lt. McC. came by to see Helen - we found Ebb Titus and Maj. Crump, the latter arrived last night, so we will have Helen's affair over tomorrow. Ebb went over to Aunt Mary's for Tate, they all arrived double quick, had arrangements all made up with Maj. C. Mary and I drove out to Aunt M. in the Ambulance, they were very buisy making preperations for the happy event. I finished my Grenadine this eve. Tate and her crowd returned to Aunt M. Maj. C. and his Bro. Lt. C. called this eve. Maj. staid to Tea. Jim and Decatur arrived from Tupelo. No news from Eddie yet, and I fear he will not hear in time to come - they all sat up so late, I retired, but Nannie with her loud talking awakened me. No news from the Army, but received a letter from home, all well, dated 10th, the Yanks to breakfast for three mornings.
June, Thursday 23, 1864
        A bright and beautiful day for Helen's bridal. The boys all left soon after breakfast. Hal came over with Decatur, went home to fix up her things to go to Aunt Mary's. Nan and Helen went over before dinner, Mary, Hal, myself and Andrew and Willie went after dinner, Ebb driveing us, found all in readiness for the important event. Guests arrived late, we had a happy time in prepereing . Hal & Jim leading, Capt. Morton & I next, Mary & Capt. Scruggs, the last shall be first, so came Nannie & Lt. Crump, then the bride and Groom. All in readiness, the Minister proceeded, and in a few moments Helen, my baby Sister, was changed to the care of one whom I pray may make her life happy. My dear, my sainted Mother, we are now seperated , long has the link of affection which you strove to bind together been fading. I was forcibly reminded of it in her marriage, by her preference for Nannie as first bridesmaid. Oh! God bless and guide my poor bruised, weary heart, farewell Helen. I still had hope in our Mother's guidance until your test tonight. Annie Gordon and Willie Killpatrick added a heavenly picture to the bridal train in their part, Candle holders - Once more oh! God have mercy on me - oh! have mercy on me.



June, Friday 24, 1864
        A bright and lovely day, but one of the warmest I ever experienced. We were all up at 8 o'clock breakfast. Hal, Nannie and I roomed together, tried our fortunes, and did not go to bed until day was breaking, did not feel like I had nay sleep at all. Helen was very composed, we went in her
room as soon as Maj. Crump went down, we all met in the Parlor after breakfast. Lina, Tobe and Jack all came out, we had a nice time, Hal came home with them - Nannie, Mary, Robert and I came home before dinner, Decatur drove. I had a nap before and after dinner, therefore do not feel very sleepy, but I do think it is the warmest night I ever felt. Bro. Geo. and Tate came home this evening to pack up, prepareatory to leave in the morning. We have a house full tonight. Tate, Bro. Geo. and Rob in the Parlor, Nannie, Mary, Mamie and I in our room. Mary and I made a pallet in the hall for Jim. John, Ebb, and Decatur are enjoying it, from the way they are laughing and talking. Helen & Maj. Crump did not come over this evening, are going over to Oxford in the morning - poor Nannie is trying to fix her toe - the rest asleep. I am almost sufocated -



June, Saturday 25, 1864
        The changes of life, how sad, oh! my heart how sad. A lively time until after breakfast, our little crowd began to scatter. Tate, Bro. Geo. Nannie, Mamie, Rob and Bet all left for Tupelo. Decatur and Jim left with them, Ebb started for Camp below Aberdeen. Maj. Crump and Helen called for a few moments, on their way to Oxford. I felt that my heart would break, may God protect and guide them both - grant their life may be happy, and no clouds gather in future over the bright present. Oh! Helen, my Sister, farewell, farewell. I have loved you when you little dreamed, even a thought was for you. Mother, oh Mother, hover near us, bind our hearts closer - God bless my dear Father, and his household.
 Mary and I have had a very lonely time, John left after dinner, failed to get a wagon. I ironed for the first time this evening. Hal and Capt. Duke came over this evening, we will leave Monday for Tupelo, poor Mary, she will then indeed be lonely. Bro. Will and the boys retired early, Mary and I will soon follow suite, it is very oppresive , and oh! so lonely, so lonely. God have mercy on me -



June, Sunday 26, 1864
        We had a late, and rather quiet breakfast, comparatively speaking, the little boys went to Sunday School and to our great joy and surprise Eddie and Jake Anderson arrived - came up to the Wedding, and knew nothing of its having taken place until after they came, both were greatly disapointed , and poor Eddie was really grieved. Oh! I can never cease to regret his not haveing notice of it. Jim Titus, in his usual way, I fear was not punctual in sending the Dispatch. Eddie is very anxious to go over and see Helen but will not have time, goes to Tupelo with us tomorrow. Jake went visiting after dinner, has not returned yet. John & Decatur arrived from Tupelo this eve, after baggage, but we had sent it on in a Government Wagon. No late news from any point. I feel real unhappy about leaveing Bro. Will and the children, it will be so lonely - however the Children leave for their Grand Ma's Tuesday. Oh! God, have mercy on my Father and his household. Bless my dear Bro.



June, Monday 27, 1864
        Hal and I did not get an early start, she and I came in the Ambulance
with John to drive us. Decatur and Capt. Rodgers came in my Wagon, we had a very pleasant trip, arrived at Mrs. Sample's about 1 o'clock. She took us in, and we feel very fortunate in getting here, our room is very warm and disagreeable, but she is the nicest person about her household I ever saw, plenty to eat. We had a delightful time this evening, our friends came out from Tupelo to see us. Maj. Allison, Capt. Ewing, two Mr. Dunns, Thulus Beaumont & Jim Titus, we had a happy time, they all left before Tea. Bro. Geo. Tate, Nannie, Hal and I did not have a very lively time, it was entirely too warm, all came to our room early, and I feel that I will sufocate . Eddie and Jake have not arrived yet. Poor Mary and Bro. Will and the little boys I know are lonely tonight. God bless my poor old Father, My dear Bros, and oh! have mercy on our brave Soldiers - Crown them with Victory and give us peace -



June, Tuesday 28, 1864
        Mrs. Sample, our hostess, had us up very early. Bro. Geo. went to Tupelo after breakfast, taking Robert with him, oh! the heat is almost intolerable. John came and brot Hal's and my bagage from Hd Qts. did not stay very long - Eddie and Jake Anderson arrived from Pontotoc before dinner, spent the day with us. I was never so warm and sleepy in my life as after dinner this day. Our friends from Tupelo came out early this evening - Mr. Galloway, John, Decatur, Bose Pugh, they left about sundown, Eddie and Jake went in also. Jim and Thulus Beaumont came out to Tea, we were haveing a nice time when Mrs. Sample sent for us to retire, this rather shocked us, but making the best of it, the boys in a laughing humor departed.


    I am so undecided in my movements, Hal is flighty, never of the same mind two hours. God guide me in the right path. I know not today where tomorrow will be spent. Bless my Father, and Bros. Crown our Armys with Victory, oh! Give us success and peace -



June, Wednesday 29, 1864
        Nannie and Mr. Pugh left for Aberdeen early this morning, Decatur came out, did not stay very long. Eddie and Jake spent the day with us again, the order for them to leave tomorrow has been countermanded, and they are all delighted, their horses are completely broken down since their march from Montivalo. Capt. Barber and Jack Doyle came to see us, we had a nice time. Hal's Bro. Frank spent the day with us also. Hal & I made a Soldier's shirt this morning - poor fellows I wish I could always have it in my power to gratify their wishes. It has been a terible warm day, and I have been unhappy, oh! so unhappy, so undecided about my movements. I believe Hal has concluded to stand still until the command is ordered to leave again. No news from home yet, Forrest has changed his plans for the present, of course we know nothing of their movements -



June, Thursday 30, 1864
        Well, we have managed to exist through another terible warm day. Eddie and Jake spent the day with us again, Hal's Bro. Frank also. Gen. Forrest reviewed the Artilery this morning, we did not get to see them. Capt. - now Maj. Morton, and Lt. Blakemore called to see us. Bruce arrived today from the Army of Tenn. Gen. Johnston, he was slightly wounded and has a
thirty days leave. Hal was delighted to see him, and saved a trip to the Army - as he will take Eddie's things to him. Robert went to Hd. Qts. with his Paper today. Hal and I took extra pains this evening in our dress but had no calls. We heard the sad fate of two of our friends in Henderson's Scouts, the Yankees hung them near Moscow, - Mr. Bonner and Lt. McConnell. Oh! this horible , horible war - our poor boys are looking for a battle every day, and expect to go in under the black Flag - Oh! heavenly Father we pray and beseech thee to hear our prayers - drive the enemy from our soile and give us peace -