September, Thursday 1, 1864
        Today is the first of Autumn - No falling leaves or withering buds greet us - all is sunshine and happiness - fruit in abundance, and our bath as delightful as in Summer time. Mary Lou has more confidence in swimming, yet I can go farther - Poor Lou's relations were with her, and she could not indulge. We all enjoy life at Waverly, more than any place I have chanced to meet since the War. Gen. Cheatam's Orderly came today for the horses, the Maj. & Gov. have gone, so no more horse back pleasures for Lou & I. Forrest has completely rid the Country above of Yanks, all bright in his Camp, nothing deffinite from Va. Ga. or Mobile. Lou and I redeemed our character tonight, in opposition to Mrs. Reynolds and Mary Lou -
September, Friday 2, 1864
        Today has been one of the warmest I ever experienced - Lou and I buisy sewing on her dress - I finished the waiste , Lizzie the skirt and I think we will finish it tomorrow -
        No news from any point today - Mary Lou joined Lou to entertain relations, Mrs. Reynolds & Mrs. Johnson went to Mrs. Hamilton's, so Mrs. Young and I had the Pond to ourselves and the water was delightful after this warm day. Lou & I beat again at Cards -
        10 o'clock at night - still suffocating. I don't know how we shall manage to get through the night.



September, Saturday 3, 1864
        Oh misery how warm it has been - heard this morning at the breakfast Table Gen'l Chalmers with his command would be at West Point today, and have watched eagerly to hear news from home, as Maj. Crump is with him, but alas have been sadly disapointed . I am very sad never to hear one word, it does seem they might find some way to send me word - Lou and I with Lizzie's assistance finished Lou's dress, and it fits really nice, and I am thankful.
        Mrs. McGavrock and Mrs. Hamilton called this morning. We all had a delightful bath, after the scorching heat. Lou and I beat Mrs. Reynolds & Mary Lou badly at Cards. Mr. Chambers sent the Ladies two latest novels, in which we all expect a great treat - Joseph 2d Court - Ladie Audlie's Secret -
September, Sunday 4, 1864
        Another warm day and much excitement in our family, for sympathy with a neighbor and friend whose only son was wounded at Atlanta, and after four week's suffering, this morning had his leg amputated, reaction has barely taken place, and very little hopes of his life. Lou is much distressed, and her exclamations of sympathy for poor Billy Burt weigh heavily on my spirits, although I am not acquainted with the young man. Mrs. Hamilton received a note from her husband at West Point, he had seen Eddie and Maj. Crump, said Eddie would be over today, but alas, I was sadly disapointed . No news from home yet - Maj. Cheatham arrived from Atlanta today, seems very hopeful. God grant our Armies may be victorious.



September, Monday 5, 1864
        I cut my foullard Silk and we have all been buisy sewing on it all day, Lou the skirt, Ellen (Lou P. maid) the flounce, Mrs. Reynolds and Mary Lou the Rosettes and I finished the waiste , we did not half finish the dress. Lou, Mary Lou & I went in the Pond early, I swam across with Lou's assistance, and got a terible ducking at floating - Heard from West Point, Eddie and Maj. Crump will be down tomorrow. Maj. Cheatham & Mary Lou played against Lou and I and we beat them badly. Mrs. Johnson & Hamilton went to sit up with Billy Burt, who I am happy to say is much better, received a letter from Maj. Price & Therese Blennerhassett -



September, Tuesday 6, 1864
        Maj. Crump, Eddie and Capt. Daly, in company with Gen. Chalmers and
Staff came down from Tupelo West Point, all stoped at Mrs. Jim Young's to tea, the first named came down here after tea - we all sat up very late, and spent a very pleasant evening



September, Wednesday 7, 1864
        Our friends remained with us over to day, and we have had a very pleasant day - playing cards, backgammon, Chess, Music &c - All walked down to the pond this eve, of course did not go in bathing as the gentleman were with us - We have all had some grand mistakes, if this horrid war lasts much longer we will all be so demoralized we cannot entertain Gentleman , so accustomed we are to speaking free to each other -



September, Thursday 8, 1864
        Maj. C. Capt. D. and Eddie all left after breakfast for West Point.
        We have had comparatively a quiet day. No news of importance from any point.



September, Friday 9, 1864
        Very cool and delightful - I finished my foullard Silk - if the weather improves as fast as it has done for the last few days, I think I will soon be left high and dry in my white dresses.
        We had a call from some young Ladies of Columbus, Miss Jennie Ebert, Misses Williams, Capt. Martin and our little friend Therese. No news with them, nor have we heard any of importance today. Lou, Mary Lou & I called
on Mrs. Young this evening - We had a game of Cards, Lou and I were not so fortunate, Maj. Cheatham & Mary Lou ran very evenly with us -



September, Saturday 10, 1864
        Today has been rather warm, and very idly spent by me. We have played Cards or backgammon most of the time. Lou and I beat Mrs. Reynolds and Maj. Cheatham badly after Tea. No news today, and nothing to write in my Diary - Of course 'tis always pleasant to me, I have always been happy since my stay at Waverly.



September, Sunday 11, 1864
        Mrs. Johnson, Mary Lou, Maj. Cheatham and Woodie went to Church, Lou, Mrs. Reynolds & I spent the morning reading, &c - All slept in the afternoon. Mr. Clapp & Lucas arrived from Holly Spring, found his Wife doing her own work. The Yanks made a complete wreck of every thing in their last raide . Lou, Mary Lou & I went up to Mr. Hamilton's after tea - had a very pleasant evening, and beautiful moonlight walk -



September, Monday 12, 1864
        Lou and I went up to see little Willie Young, he was better but quite sick last night. Mrs. Young came home with us, and brought him.
        I sewed some on Mrs. Reynolds dress, have spent the day quite pleasantly, and had a delightful bath in the pond. Maj. Crump arrived just as we finished tea, and of course I have had a delightful evening. Lou and I beat Mary Lou & Maj. Cheatham badly at Cards, Mrs. R. and Maj. Crump played chess -
September, Tuesday 13, 1864
        Maj. Crump, Maj. Cheatham, Mrs. Reynolds, Lou, Mary Lou & I have spent a very pleasant day. Eddie arrived from West Point this morning - Lou made him a beautiful Tobacco bag, Mary Lou made Maj. Crump one. We all went in bathing, I swam across the Pond for the first time. Lou and I beat Eddie & Mary Lou at Cards - Mrs. Reynolds & Maj. Crump played backgammon. We sat up right late. I received a letter from Bro. Will asking me to come and stay with Mary & the Children until he returned, & of course will go, but have made no arrangements as yet -



September, Wednesday 14, 1864
        Today has been a sad one to many members of this household, or rather has terminated sadly to some. Maj. Crump and Eddie left this morning for Grenada, where Gen. Chalmers' command has been ordered - I am so unhappy tonight, my heart aches to see dear Lou in trouble. She had a long letter from Miss Sallie Sanders giving a rememberance of her Sister Prudie's last illness - Lou's dearest friend. I did not know her, but ah! Lou, my heart's deepest sympathy is yours. Maj. Cheatham received a letter from Ga. bearing news of the death of one of his dearest friends, he left after tea - so we all came to our room. Lou, Sallie & Mary Lou all reading - oh! my poor weary heart, when, when will it be at rest -



September, Thursday 15, 1864
        Today had been quite cool, and we have spent it very quietly sewing
all morning. After dinner Lou and I beat Maj. Cheatham badly at cards &c after Tea. we had a nice time in the Pond, but cold weather is fast approaching, I am very much afraid I will be left in my white dresses out of season -
        I received a long, nice letter from Capt. Henderson tonight, accompanying a Chicago Times, he gave me all the news, and I shall ever feel grateful for his kind rememberance on leaving with Forrest, with 40 of his best men for Sherman's rear. God grant some bright spot may cheer us from that brave little band -



September, Friday 16, 1864
        Autumn is fast approaching, today has been quite cool - We have spent the day as usual delightfully at Waverly. Cards being order of the day - A delightful bath, though rather cool - I made Maj. Cheatham a nice Chess bag.



September, Saturday 17, 1864
        Another cool day, spent very idly by all, playing cards most of the day - this evening Mary Lou, Mrs. James Young and I went in the Pond alone, Lou sitting on the bank looking on. Both my friends had gone out, I alone in, when a Company of Soldiers passed. I am sorry to say our Confederate Soldiers would so far forget themselves as to notice a Ladie in bathing, but more so to say those stoped and made several remarks loud enough to be heard. I was not uneasy, knowing the Officers would keep them straight.
        Lou and I are going to take a dose of Medicine, as we are very much in Job's fix -
September, Sunday 18, 1864
        All went to Church his morning except Lou, Mary Lou and I, we had a nice, quiet time. I fixed poor Lou's afflicted head, and am really distressed she has taken that terible eruption.
        Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton came down to Tea. We all walked down to the Tombigbee, had a delightful drink from the Artesian Well.



September, Monday 26, 1864
        Left dear Waverly at 9 o'c this morning. Mrs. Johnson and Reynolds accompanied me, and tonight we find ourselves quietly ensconsed at Mrs. Henderson's. I met many of my friends at West Point, Gen. Forrest's Hd. Qts. are there. Mr. Hamilton put us aboard the train, and fortunately I met with an old friend, Tub Anderson, who was guard on the train, he assisted us a great deal. We have spent the evening very pleasantly at Mrs. Henderson's, she is a fine musician, and very accomodating . I miss my friend Lucy so much. Nothing very exciting has transpired today.



September, Tuesday 27, 1864
        Oh! how lonely this day has been to me. Mrs. Johnson and Reynolds returned to Waverly on the 7 o'c train. My Hack came soon after, when I left - and I do not think anyone could have spent so lonely a ride as I did, no person except the driver. Mrs. Henderson was very kind indeed to me. I arrived at Pontotoc about 1 o'clock, found Mary alone and delighted to see me. Very stormy and rainy, so I have not accomplished anything and made no preperations for my trip, but will certainly, if providence permits,
leave here Thursday morning. I sat up quite late writing to dear Lucy, so that I could send by the boy who drove me up and have mailed at Okolona -



September, Wednesday 28, 1864
        Well mercy on me if Pontotoc can't take the lead for dulness , and no way to get on! - I succeeded in getting $50 in G. B. from a Servant - Bro. Will came home about 1 o'c - went over to town and thinks perhaps I can get Mr. Carr to take me over. Cousin Ginnie and Eddie Miller came over and staid a few moments only. No news on earth, and not worth while to write in my journal.



September, Friday 30, 1864
        Left Pontotoc 8 o'clock this morning, traveled very hard, but could not make the distance, had a very hard storm about 3 o'c, got perfectly drenched, and oh! how I ached, could not prevail on Mr. Carr to drive me on to Oxford, stoped at a miserable place 2 1/2 miles from there, and oh! such filth, for any one pretending to civilization. I did not sleep an hour, spent a wretched night. Could not eat such filth, and went to bed hungry -