May, Sunday 1, 1864
        I slept very late this morning. Tate and Helen ready to start to Church when I went in the Parlor - Uncle Elam went with them. Father, Mary, Robert and I were left at home. Mr. Hildebrand and Mr. Madden spent the morning with us - they had no late news - neither did we hear any from the girls. Five Yankees found where John, William, Ben & David Hildebrand and Ben Henderson were hid on Day's creek, about a mile from here and surprised them, although they were fast asleep, they made their escape. The Yanks fired twice only, our little band were not armed armed for a fight, therefore beat a hasty retreat. The Yanks then came to old Mr. Hildebrand's, did not stay long, we saw them pass on the ridge returning to Memphis.
        Nannie and Joanna have not returned yet, cannot imagine what keeps them. The Yanks sent out a heavy force after Forrest yesterday. God bless our little band, and crown them with victory - guide my Bro, and keep him safe through all danger - Came to my room early - Father retired so early - We think the Yankees are at Mr. Hildebrand's now, so much noise, and two guns fired. God bless my dear Father, and protect him from the Yankees.



May, Monday 2, 1864
        Very cold and disagreeable - had to keep large fires to keep warm.
No Yankees have been out today - the lines are still closed, Nannie and Joanna have not got home yet. Cousin Frazor, John and Mr. Wormely got here from Dixie today - everything is cheering from below. Gen. Price has demolished Stith's entire army, capturing all of his Artillery, Wagon train and demoralizing his entire command. We have not heard from Forrest yet, but our faith in him is implicit, he will be successful. Oh! I think the bright day for Dixie is dawning. God is just, our prayers are answered, oh! let us be humble, and pray constantly in our success, thy will, not ours, be done. I made Laura a dress today - Sallie Hildebrand & Mary Robinson came down and spent the evening - Mr. Wormely went on over to Mr. Holmes - the Hildebrands all got off safe last night , everything has been unusually quiet in the neighborhood today - I did not stay in the Parlor very late. Bettie & Laura both buisy sewing.



May, Tuesday 3, 1864
        The lines still closed, no news from Memphis, can't tell when Nannie and Joanna will be home - I did not get up until nearly dinner, spent the remainder of the day sewing for Laura, trying to get her clothes in order, it seems I can never get her again for any length of time. No one has been here today. John spent the day hid in the woods with Cousin Frazor's horse - Father as usual running round trying to hear the news. I think the Country is rather dull, since the blockade - This is a lonely day in my weary life, and I can record nothing which would give, either pleasure or profit in after years to look back upon - the children have been happy
at play - and I expect Helen and Tate have passed the day pleasantly together - mine has been alone. Father and Cousin Frazor left the Parlor early after tea - John & I sat up right late talking, and I played for him. Laura is still sewing and nodding - no bread for Goslins, they are very noisy



May, Wednesday 4, 1864
        I have sewed buisy all day, finished my white braided swiss - I think it is beautiful. Laura finished her new Calico, we both had to sew very late tonight to finish them. Bettie got sleepy and went home some time since - We all had a considerable fright tonight - by Anna Nelson sending to warn us of danger if any Confederate Soldiers were here - so poor Johny, although he has spent the day in the woods, shouldered his blanket, took his Pa's horse, and went to the woods. Cousin Frazor will stay in and take the chances. Capt. Floyd with 20 men passed about dusk, going across the creek, don't know their destination - the lines open this evening - Joanna and Nannie got home - no news of interest - We are still victorious on all sides, the negroes have raised the black flag - gone out on a raide after Forrest, and I will bet, but few will ever return, - God grant not one life of our dear Soldiers will be sacrificed to those cowardly dogs. Oh! give us victory, that peace may once again smile on our Sunny land. God bless my poor old Father and dear Bros.



May, Thursday 5, 1864
        I have spent a most unhappy day, - half sick, and the "black spirits"
haunted me teribly - oh! I don't know what is the matter with me - or what on earth is to become of me. I spent the evening sewing on Harriet's dress - Laura and Bettie both sewed late, yet I am left alone, and no prospects of sleep relieveing my poor, weary, aching heart - I pray for hope, and patience, yet virtue is lost in everything to me in my present state of feeling. Old Mrs. Holmes, Mr. Wormely, & Bedford came over this evening, no news except a rumor that Forrest had beaten the Nigger troops who left Memphis - God grant it may be so. Poor Danie Donelson's body has been found, at Pounder' ford, he was murdered, on his way back to the Army - his only Bro was killed at battle of Chickamauga - oh! heavenly Father, give us peace, crown our Sunny land with victory & peace, guide my dear Brothers, and return them safe to our Father's now lonely fireside - we humbly crave thy pardon, thy forgiveness and peace.



May, Friday 6, 1864
        I got up very early this morning, finished Harriet's dress a little after dinner, just one day making it, I have picked my finger almost to the bone, and will have to rest for a few days and let it recruit. I slept all the evening, have spent the day alone, and it has seemed teribly long. No Yankees out on our road today. A heavy scout passed down the Hernando road, a very heavy picket on Nonconnah, since Floyd's raide yesterday - poor old Mr. Farrer got in trouble yesterday, the Yanks carried him in Memphis and put him in the Irving Block, we have not heard any of the particulars. Cousin Mat, Frazor & Cousin Sallie came out this evening, - news, we have another victory on Red River, captured three more Gun Boats -
Oh! how thankful we are for the bright days which are dawning - we humbly crave thy blessings for victory and peace - Received a letter from Jimmie in London, the crew men all well and in fine spirits - God bless both my dear Bros, and guard them from all danger and temptation - bless my poor old Father, and keep trouble from his last days - oh! make me a better woman. Frazor is 9 years old today - we have not heard from Eddie for several days.



May, Saturday 7, 1864
        I went over to Mrs. Clayton's early this morning to make arrangements with Hal about going South, did not find her at home, waited until after 3 o'c but did not get to see her. Spent a very pleasant day - heard no news - came by Mrs. Duke's to see Beulah, poor Dog, she was almost crazy when she met me. I could not stay many minutes, and it almost broke my heart to see Beulah begging to come. Peter and I started on home, met two Yankees, they were drunk, and frightened me very much. We had a very rough trip home, came through to the Hernando road, the Pickets on Nonconnah did not ask me for a pass. Saw old Mr. Farrer just getting home, he has only one week to be out of this country. A Yankee detective with a woman came to stay all night, Father was afraid not to take him, just after they stoped , in came two of the 2nd. Mo. Cav. Mr. Grile and Mr. Davis, they did not come in when we told them who was here, for fear it would get Father in trouble - the detective (Lewis) was very uneasy for fear they would take - I hope they will get him after he leaves here in the morning -


May, Sunday 8, 1864
        I had a nice time sleeping late this morning, and Laura had a nice, Breakfast to tempt my apetite when awakened - the Detective and his lady friend had left before I got in the Parlor. John and Cousin Frazor kept in the dark all morning, though every was quiet, we have not heard what the raide was for which passed down Hernando road yesterday, they staid in Hernando last night. Old Mr. Hildebrand came down after dinner, though we have not heard a word of news today - in fact it will be almost a nonentity in the pages of my sad and weary life. I have read in my Bible mostly - went to sleep after dinner, and did not wake up until late in the evening - all went to walk except myself. Anna Nelson and Mrs. Lewis came here for some Soldier clothes, but they had not been left here. I did not stay in the house late, Bettie and Laura gave me a great deal of trouble about their lessons tonight - all quiet now, Bettie gone home. Laura and the Goslins both fast asleep - I trust sleep will soon relieve my weary brain -



May, Monday 9, 1864
        I slept very late, Laura came in to clean my room, did everything but make the bed, I told her if she would let me alone I would make the bed. I have been sewing on my white mull, did not get much done, have it all arranged, and hope to finish it tomorrow. We had a delightful rain this evening. Cousin Frazor bought John a horse today, from Mr. Madden. The two Miss Robinsons came over this evening, trying to find out where their Bros were, whom Floyd conscripted, we could tell them nothing, poor things I feel sorry for them, although they are such wicked people. Three Confederate
Soldiers came riding up while they were here, I am very much afraid they will report it to the Yankees. I did not go in the Parlor after Tea, the rest were all in, singing and playing, which I enjoyed all alone on the Porch. Father sat a while - Laura and Bettie had a very good lesson - all asleep now except myslef, and I am prepared for a nice feast in one of the Waverly's - the Abbot, it will draw my mind, for a while at least, from it's own sad and weary thoughts -



May, Tuesday 10, 1864
        Cloudy and rainy, I got up to breakfast as Mr. Harbut came, he is cut off from his command, and has no news. We heard Forrest had got safely out of Tenn. Tate and Joanna went to Memphis this morn, did not get back and we have not heard a word, suppose the raine must have kept them, we had a very hard storm this evening. Mrs. Franklin & Miss Kate Daughterty arrived from Dixie this morning, they say we have had a glorious victory in Virginia, but a dearly bought one - loss heavy on both sides. The Confederates Victorious as always under our brave Gen. Lee. A sad loss will be our gallant Longstreet, we hear he is mortally wounded, heaven forbid the correctness of the report - oh! my heavenly Father, enlighten the hearts of our wicked foe, and let them leave our lovely land, - think of the thousands of souls hastened into eternity - we humbly crave thy pardon, grant us thy blessings, and give us peace, oh! give us peace - all we ask - drive them from our land, we have sinned, but now are humble. God bless my dear Father, and Brothers, and unite them once again -



May, Wednesday 11, 1864
        Tate and Joanna went to Memphis this morning - what a mistake - on
yesterday they went in, did not return until this evening. Joanna and Miss Em, and little Emie all came, oh! I was so delighted to see Mrs. Perkins - Nannie came out very early, started to go to Germantown, for John a horse, too late. Poor Cousin Mat and little Frazor had to return with Mrs. S. to M. - No news from Mr. Harbut yet - he is always very prompt, we think it very strange he did not return. We all spent the evening in the Parlor. Mrs. Tom Nelson came this evening - bro't intelligence of Poor Mr. Facklen's death - he killed himself drinking, died with Mania potin I do pity his Wife, and poor little children - and such a horrible death - no late news from either side - Miss Em and I talked nearly all night -



May, Thursday 12, 1864
        Miss Em and I took breakfast in our room - it was bitter cold this morning, and I have taken my stove down. Mr. Nelson very impatient, Mr. Brett arrived about 11 o'clock, had succeeded in getting a pass for Mr. N. from Gen'l Washburn, good for one week - they left about 12. We all sat in the Parlour in the morning - after dinner Miss Em and I came out to my room and spent the evening - Nannie and Emie came also. Oh! I wish they would quit speaking of the war, or Politics. Cousin Frazor was tight at dinner, and as he and Mrs. Perkins differed, he was very rough and disagreeable - we did not sit up so late. Bettie and Anna Nelson reached home safe, but very late. No important news - no news from Mr. Harbut yet -



May, Friday 13, 1864
        Miss Em, Joanna, Anna Nelson, Tate's children and Kate all went to Memphis
this morning, all returned except Mary, who they left with Tate. We have had a quiet day, comparatively speaking. No Yankees - Mr. Wilson and Mr. Pope came this evening - been up several days, no late news. Poor Mr. Harbut was captured on yesterday, at Mr. Rutland's on the plank road, both of his fine horses captured - no news from him since he went into Memphis - Mr. Keene, who came out with Cousin Sallie, said Banks had certainly surrendered with 35,000 men - God grant it may be true - nothing deffinite from Virginia, though the slaughter has been terible on both sides. Oh! my Father in heaven, crown our Army with Victory - God give us peace, I am so weary of so much bloodshed - bless my dear Father and Brothers -



May, Saturday 14, 1864
        Miss Em and I slept until almost 12 o'clock - I finished Emie's dress after getting up, Miss Em cut out her new Calico and run on the skirt. No Yankees today, neither have we seen a Confederate - Joanna and Anna Nelson went in this morning with the wagon to get supplies, as this is the last day the lines will be open. All of them got back safe with a permit for all they wanted. Tate came out with all of Helen's Bridal trosseau - still no decisive news from Virginia - papers all suppressed, which appears rather ominous - Oh! heaven hear the humble, and heart rending prayers of our poor suffering South, - drive the wicked Northman from our soile , protect and guide my Bros safely through, may they do their duty nobly - bless my poor old Father - I am miserable, what is to become of me -
May, Sunday 15, 1864
        This has been an unpleasant, unhappy Sabbath - oh! we differ so in politics from Miss Em - I am afraid her visit will be miserable. Helen and Nannie went to Church - Col. Perkins came home with them, spent the evening. Capt. Wormely came over to spend the night, preparatory to leaving at daylight in company with Cousin Frazor and Johnie, poor John, he has not got him a horse, or his clothes - Mrs. Titus, his step mother, has treated him shamefully.
        Miss Em had a talk with Nannie this evening, and she has been miserable ever since - I do not know what it is, but they are so widely different in Politics - I pray that Miss Em may not insist on Nannie leaveing . I shudder for the results, she says she will not go. We heard our Army in Va. was victorious - I pray that it may be so, and this horrible war closed. No communication with the City today, Miss Em speaks of going tomorrow - she has a free pass - she is sick in bed tonight - all retired very early -



May, Monday 16, 1864
        Laura awakened me at daylight to see Cousin Frazor, John and Capt. Wormely leave for Dixie - they left early for fear they would meet a squad of Yanks later in the day. Miss Em and Nannie went to Memphis this morning, got back safe, no late news except Yankee lies, which say that we are beaten in Va. and I do not believe one word of it - never will hear the truth until we get the Southern account. Mr. Wilson came this evening, bro't me a package of Southern papers (Mobile & Richmond) though not very late date - therefore nothing deffinite from Lee's army - he had no late news, currier up yesterday -
Nannie saw Mr. Harbut at the Provost Marshall today - he will be sent to Alton in a few days. Mr. Crawford came for Nannie today, was very much disapointed - I read all the morning, made me a dress waiste after dinner - Oh! how my heart has yearned for this visit from Miss Em, and how sadly disapointed , yet I have learned to bury my sorrow within my own breast - there is a terible gap in our social circle, we are so widely different in Politics.



May, Tuesday 17, 1864
        Oh! most miserable day - Mrs. Perkins almost made me mad at her deep distress - Poor, poor Nannie, my heart aches for her, would to God I might be the medium through which all could be made happy - Miss Em is so widely different in her political feeling, there will never be any happiness, I fear, with poor Nannie. May God guide the dear child, keep her firm to the cause she has espoused, may she never have her pure, noble Southern feelings polluted with Yankee treachery or tyrany - keep her firm and true to her noble Brother Dashiell and his Country rights - she dreams not, but oh! my heart trembles and bleeds for her in this great trial and affliction. I received a letter from Dr. Moses - Tate did also - Oh! why am I tempted - guide, oh! comfort me, my Savior - poor Father is quite sick - Joanna went to Hernando this morning -



May, Wednesday 18, 1864
        When, oh! when will this wickedness and strife end - my heart how sadly, and how sorely, it has been tried. God have mercy and keep it pure, through
all temptations - bless poor Miss Em, be with her in this affliction, guide dear Nannie in the right path - I pray that it may be all right - thy will, and I am content - Col. Perkins came this morning, Nannie had not decided to stay when he was here. Mr. Nelson took dinner with us, on his way to Dixie. Mr. & Mrs. Lake came down here to meet him, missed him only a few moments. Mr. Crawford came this evening. Miss Em sent a note to Col. Perkins by him. Mr. Huchins was here also - with all the arrivals of persons and newspapers, no reliable news. My dear redeemer I pray, oh! I humbly beseech thee to bless our brave little bands in Va. and Ga - crown them victory, oh! give thy blessing to our dear Sunny land. Give us peace, then will we praise thy great and glorious reighn , through all eternity.



May, Thursday 19, 1864
        It seems that trouble and misery will never cease. Miss Em almost killed herself with chloroform last night, did not get up until late this evening, and is still very feeble and miserable from the effects. Nannie has been in bed all day, seems to be quite sick tonight - poor old Father, he is almost prostrated with trouble. I wish I had some influence, oh! that I could be the medium of reconciliation & peace between Miss Em and the family - there is a breach which can never be healed - she is raving mad whenever she speaks or thinks of Tate and Helen - poor little Emie, the child is miserable. Heard from Dashiell last night, but do not dare to show the letter to his Mother. I think the scriptures are truly fulfilled in this war, Child shall be against Parent, and Parent against Child -
Col. Perkins did not come - We have heard nothing deffinite from our Armys . Joanna got back last night with Helen's cotton.
        I have been unhappy all day, no one could be in this house at this time and not be -



May, Friday 20, 1864
        Mrs. Perkins went to Memphis this morning in an awful state of mind. Col. Perkins came up to see her before she started, but I do not think she was much relieved by his visit. Nannie would not go, she did not come back tonight, although she said she would be certain to come. I am entirely weaned from any affection I ever had for her, any Southern woman to talk and express herself as she does, I have no use for her. I wish to heaven she would never come to our house again. I went over to Mr. Clayton's, on old Grey, took Peter with me, did not get to see Hal, arrived at home safe, but very much fatigued. Laura and I had a very quiet, pleasant night all alone. Joanna tried our fortunes with the cards, if they are true I do not think we will have a very exciting life for the next few days -



May, Saturday 21, 1864
        Nannie still sick in bed, got up this evening when Mr. Wilson came, I think that is the only thing which could have aroused her - Nothing unusual happened today, the news from Virginia still glorious. Oh, God! we praise, we humbly bow to thy glorious favor, of our struggle for Liberty - crown our Armys everywhere with decisive victories, and oh! we pray the for peace - Mrs. Perkins came home this evening, I am afraid she has made
her arrangements for some revengeful feelings - her plans are entirely different from when she left. I did not imagine one I loved so much - I could so soon hate. Poor old Father is almost crazy with his troubles, yet the happy news from the Army keeps him up. Mrs. Perkins staid in my room and I had anything but a pleasant night -



May, Sunday 22, 1864
        Everything has been in commotion, and anything but a quiet day. Mrs. Perkins is still disagreeable in her Politics - She and Nannie and Emie started down to Col. Perkins, broke down, came back, did not go until this evening - Hal and Mr. Clayton came today, we made our final arrangements for our trip, and will get off one day this week. Mr. Bray came over and made arrangements for Miss Tollison to go with us, she is going to marry Gen. Pat Claiborne - We have had anything but a pleasant say, Mrs. Perkins has been spouting forth her Unionism - everything has gone and we are quiet once more - I wish the day could have been more pleasant for Hal and Mr. Clayton - I wish I did not feel so bitter towards her - Thank God the news is still glorious for us from all quarters - Laura and I will have a pleasant night alone -



May, Monday 23, 1864
        I was up bright and early this morning, went over to Mr. Hudghins to get his Wife, who is going to Memphis tomorrow, to bring me out a few articles, which I am compelled to have before leaving. The day I have
spent trying to get my clothes arranged to have them done up tomorrow - it has been an unpleasant task, and altogether anything but a pleasant day to me - until this evening we were all made glad by the arrival of Sister Mary, Aunt Patsy, and our dear Sister's two youngest little Orphans - Sallie and Frank, also their nurse Nellie - both of the Children are beautiful, poor little things, how my heart aches for them, how sad is life to me without my Mother's love. Sallie is a sad little creature, very much like her Mother in appearance. Frank, the baby, is all life & happiness, they came all the way from Pontotoc in an Ox wagon, just one week coming. Mr. Wilson was here today - no later news from our Armys -



May, Tuesday 24, 1864
        Little Frank waked me up this morning bright and early, I managed to get up and send Nellie, (who was with him) to the kitchen for his breakfast, he is prettier every time I look at him. Laura did not get to washing my clothes until 11 o'clock, but finished all except three dresses and has done them beautifully. Annie Nelson & Missie Morgan came out this evening - though the lines are closed, I don't know whether Mrs. Hudghins went in or not, if she did not, I don't know what I am to do about the things I sent for. I finished my Peasants waiste , and think it beautiful. Oh! I am so unfortunate, and unhappy - I pray for patience and submission.
        No later news from Va. or Ga. I did not go in the Parlor after Tea, - the rest all spent a pleasant evening I suppose - my heart is too full to venture in company. I put little Sallie and Frank to bed.


May, Wednesday 25, 1864
        I have been quite sick all day, was taken some time in the night, Laura was very kind to me - and has been the only one in my room to see me today. Miss Em & Nannie & little Emie got home from Col. Perkins just before dinner. Poor Miss Em, she seems almost heart-broken that Nannie won't go with her. I pity her, and have forgiven all hard thoughts which once existed in my heart towards her. I wish this horrid war would not uproot so many social ties - I dressed late this evening, went on the Porch - very cool and cloudy after Tea, so we all moved in the Parlor - Sister Mary, Miss Em, Father and I spent the evening alone - the rest did not seem socially inclined, even Nannie did not come in, although it was her Ma's last night with us. Poor old Father, he tries to smooth over the ruffles all the rest make. God bless him and my dear Brothers -



May, Thursday 26, 1864
        Miss Em was almost dressed when I awoke this morning. I was very much distressed to see her leave, in rememberance of the wickedness which filled my heart a day or two ago - I have entirely forgiven, and all unpleasant feelings have passed away. Poor Miss Em, she was the picture of dispair - did not get to see Dashiell, and little Emie, oh! 'tis hard for horrid politics to interfere with social feelings - They all left quite early for Memphis. Joanna and Robert got back safe - did not bring me anything I sent for - I am very much disapointed - but must think of some other way - Capt. Farrell arrived this evening - left Tupelo on yesterday morning - all the boys were well, most of the Batalion had gone to Alabama, Eddie was
among the number - News is all we could wish for - by the grace of God Lee is still victorious. God bless our Armys , my dear Father and Brothers - Yankees gone to Hernando on a raide - have mercy and make me a better and more useful woman -



May, Friday 27, 1864
        Sister Mary and I started early over to Mrs. Armstrong's - found both Mr. and Mrs. A. at home - and as usual my best friends in trouble. Mrs. A. is going to Memphis tomorrow, and will get all the things I need and bring them out to her house. Sister Mary has made arrangements to go to town with her tomorrow to get her watch - We spent the day with Hal and Mrs. Clayton - after dinner we all came over to Mrs. Seymour's to welcome she and her husband, who had just returned from their bridal trip - poor Beulah, I met her again, she was so delighted to see me, and it almost broke my heart to part with her, how much I love my poor dog.
        Laura, Tip and I have sat up very late - I have been talking to Laura, Father will not let her go with me, I trust and pray that she may be guided through all temptation, and come to me just as I leave her - I am very unhappy to think of leaving home -



May, Saturday 28, 1864
        Sister Mary and I arrived at Mrs. Armstrong's quite late - they went on in town, I drove over to Mrs. Clayton's and spent the day. Hal is not ready to start yet, so it is doubtful whether or not we leave Monday morning. Maggie Cockrell was there, we spent a very pleasant day - I got back to
Mrs. Armstrong's quite late, found Sister Mary impatiently waiting. Mrs. A's kindness I shall never forget - she bought all my things, and brought them through the lines, they are all just as nice and pretty as can be. I left my bundle with the dress in it, when we started, so that will make another trip tomorrow, which I hope Nannie and Helen will take for me. Father gave me a deed to Laura this evening, I am grieved to leave her, exposed to so many temptations, but hope the principal I have always endeavored to instill may save her. My room is all confusion, trunk not packed - every thing scattered.



May, Sunday 29, 1864
        Today has been an eventful one in the dull pages of my life - Bettie awakened me, standing by the bed, with a hot cup of Coffee - which I enjoyed very much, after refreshing myself with a cold bath.
        Mr. Wilson came by, with late despatches, letters and papers - the latter containing news which paralyzed me for a while, oh! such a shock, yet I had expected it - (At Arcola, Ala. April 27th. 1864, by Rev. Mr. Beckwith, G. A. Moses, P. A. C. S. to Miss Sallie S. Anderson, of Mobile, Ala.) there is a future, oh! thank God, thy will not mine be done - in thee I trust, in thee I shall be saved -
        Father went over to Mr. Bray's, but failed to get a conveyance for me to go to Dixie in - Helen and Nannie went over Nonconnah to get the bundles I forgot, and also to see Hal - she has not all arrangements made, and will not be ready before Wednesday. Our news today is very encouraging - thanks to the Almighty the day for our glorious Confederacy & independence is brightening.
Packed today - Laura & I spent the evening alone - God bless my servant and take care of her. God bless and protect my dear Father and Brothers.



May, Monday 30, 1864
        Began the day quite early - drew off the pattern on Nannie's dress first thing - Tate asked me to fix the Machine, she sewed for me while I did it - Father went over to Mr. Farrers to see Mr. Hodge, and try to trade for his Spring wagon - he asked so much for it, I hope Father will not get it. I and Peter went over Nonconnah to try and get one from some place, failed three times, when Joe, Mrs. Clayton's gardener told me of a Mr. Smith who had one. Dink and I went over to Mr. S. we soon made a trade - only $75.00 for the wagon, tied the buggy behind, started for home again - stoped at Mrs. Duke (Seymour) saw her and Hal - no news - had a rough and troublesome trip home. Arrived safe, Father likes the wagon very much - so I am all ready for Dixie, don't know what day Hal will be here. Laura finished my dress and hemed three handkerchiefs - I don't know what I would do without Laura -
        Glorious news from the South, we have been successful in all battles - Lee whipped Grant, Johnson & Sherman - and Forrest old Dutch - Bless my dear Father and Brothers, take care of, and guide Laura -



May, Tuesday 31, 1864
        I slept very late this morning - very buisy until dinner was ready packing and drawing off the pattern on Nannie's swiss. Aunt Patsy sat in my room, just as we were going to dinner an Ambulance with Yankee escort
rode up to the gate, Mrs. Perkins comeing for Nannie - Nannie and Helen with Laura ran to the Woods, then followed a scene which I trust I may never witness again - such excitement and confusion - they scoured the woods for them, but no where to be found - Nannie has not been back since - and I expect is in Senatobia tonight - God guide and protect her. The Yanks staid about two hours & I think left disgusted with their trip, thinking, until we told them, they had come for a little child. Mrs. Perkins left in anger, swearing vengeance on Tate and Helen - Poor Father, it has broken him down, he is sick in bed. They are all ready and hope to get off by daylight - have mercy my dear Savior and spare my poor old Father any more excitement - guide us aright - and protect and shield our household -