February, Thursday 4, 1864
        We had a terrible accident to Night. Jack had Mr. Wilson's Pistol fooling with it, and shot Jane right through the body - poor fellow, he was frightened to death - it was an accident. Mr. Wilson went for the Dr. he came in a great hurry, as it was night he could not tell how serious it is, but very much fears it has struck some vital point.



February, Friday 5, 1864
        Jane doing very well, the ball although passing so near the kidneys, & spine, missed both. Dr. Shaw has examined it by daylight, and thinks she will be up again in five or six weeks -
        Peter and I went over to Mrs. Duke's - I went to Memphis in Mr.


Armstrong's wagon - got the Morphine & Chloroform. Mr. Armstrong drove me out to Mrs. Duke's - I mounted old McGruder, Peter old Sam, we got home early. Jack ran off this morning, we don't know where to - but expect he has gone to Memphis -



February, Sunday 14, 1864
        Tate and Helen cam back from Dixie today -



February, Monday 15, 1864
        I did not get up very early, was eating breakfast in my room, when I was startled by the reports of six or seven guns - dressed hurriedly, on arriving at the gate found all the family, both white and black, in the greatest state of excitement - one of the 2nd. Mo - Mr. Brent - relating to them the particulars of the skirmish which had taken place only a few hundred yards from our house - A family of negroes had got this far on their journey from Hernando to Memphis when Mr. Brent met them, and they ordered him to surrender, at the same time fireing . Of course no Southern Soldier would ever surrender to a Negro, he fired five times, being all the leads he had - killed one Negro, wounded another, he ran in the woods and we saw nothing more of him - one of the women and a little boy succeeded in getting off also - the other woman with three girls were carried back to Hernando - The Soldier got a splendid Cavalry horse & equipments, two Mules and another horse - he left expecting the Yankees. Father had the Negro burried where he was killed - No Yankees - Mr. Wilson came, no late news -
February, Monday 22, 1864
        I mounted Mr. Brent's condemned steed, which proved to be a very nice riding horse, but rather wild - I had a lovely ride, found Mrs. Morgan's after some difficulty. Mrs. Plunket was with Missie, her Mother has been very sick, but they think she is now recovering. I do not think so, she looks dreadfully, and poor Missie, my heart aches to look at her and think what trials she must in my opinion pass through - I staid until 1 o'clock, arrived at home just as they were all eating dinner - found Mr. Wilson had arrived. No news, no courier up lately -



February, Thursday 25, 1864
        Sallie Hildebrand sent down for me this morning to go with her to Mrs. Morgan's, poor Ladies, she has at last gone to rest, she died yesterday evening at 4 o'c. I went with her and stayed until sundown, returned home to try to get Joanna to go and sit up, but she would not do it. I went back with Miss Mary Robinson, met Helen and Nannie, got them to go back with us - they had been down to Col. Perkins to spend the day. Ben Henderson went with us, we did not get there until dark.
        Poor Missie, I feel so sorry for her.



February, Friday 26, 1864
        Nannie, Helen, and Miss Mary Robinson and myself sat up last night with Mrs. Morgan's corps - It was a sad and lonely night - Poor Missie, how my heart sympathizes with her in this great affliction. Helen and Nannie came home very early, Miss Robinson and I staid until after breakfast,
when Miss Huckens came we left. Tate & Joanna went to the funeral, after that Joanna and Cousin S. returned Memphis -
        A squad of 7 Confederates stoped at the gate - belonging to 2nd. Ark -
        I went to sleep directly after breakfast, and did not awaken until after dinner. I was never in such a cross humor as I have been tonight. I feel ashamed for the way in which I have spoken to Bettie and Laura - nobody knows what I have to try me sometimes. Bettie left early, Laura fast asleep - Beulah & Tippie Dora both nodding - here I sit at 3 o'clock morning, with four packages of 300 letters for our Rebel Soldiers, which it has taken me until this time of night to finish. I will lie down and take a nap - I had to wake Laura to get me fresh water, I was so sick. She is always kind to me.



February, Saturday 27, 1864
        Annie Nelson and myself went to Memphis this morning - very warm, dusty and disagreeable. Accomplished all I went for - did not go near any of the Officials, was fortunate to meet a kind friend, Lucie Harris, who gave me her pass - 'tis a risk, yet we can accomplish nothing without great risk at times, I returned the favor by bringing a letter to forward to her husband, Army of Mobile. I sat up until 8 o'clock last night, arranging poor Green's mail to forward to the different command. It was a difficult job, yet a great pleasure to know I had it in my power to rejoice the hearts of our brave Southern Soldiers - most were Kentucky letters for Breckenridge's command - the rest were Mo. letters for Johnston's, Polk's, and Maury's commands. God grant them a safe and speedy trip.
        We have glorious news from Dixie - Forrest has completely routed Smith
and Grierson at Okolona - God grant my Bro Eddie may be safe - we hear his Col. Jeff Forrest was killed. The Yanks are perfectly demoralized, all that escaped have arrived in Memphis. I never witnessed such a sight as the stolen negroes, poor deluded wretches - Praise God for this Victory.



February, Sunday 28, 1864
        Cloudy and raining all day, much colder than yesterday. Anna Nelson and myself went to Mrs. Morgan's - I went to take those letters to Cousin Cambell Edmondson, he left for Dixie, and will see that they are safely forwarded. Met a great many persons there, all in fine spirits, topic of conversation our glorious Victory, which was added to this morning by news that Sherman was in full retreat for Vicksburgh - had not reached Canton, and we were confident of ruining the whole army as Lee with his Cavalry force was between him and Vicksburgh - Spare so much bloodshed of the bravest and best of our Sunny South - Enlighten the minds of the miserable Yankees, of their sinfullness - drive them from our south! Oh, just and merciful Savior, give us peace, and our independence -
        I received a letter from Dr. Moses and Maj. Price by Mrs. Facklin, through them heard from my friend Maj. Maclean, with Gen. Price.
        Laura and I sat up late tonight, I slept all evening. Still raining - 12 o'clock sleeting, very cold -



February, Monday 29, 1864
        The last day of Winter - Gloomy, oh, mercy how dreary, sleeting all
day, the shrubery is all bowed to the earth with the weight of Ice - all nature is crowned with it, yet it is so gloomy out. There is some happiness in our household, the two children Mamie and Robert are all life, though like all children, troublesome and noisy from their imprisonment. Father and Cousin Frazor have spent the day reading in the Parlor, while we have, as women generally are, buisy sewing. I fixed Laura's new dress waiste . The Servants have done little except to try to keep warm and keep fires in the house. We have seen no one today, therefore have heard nothing later from our glorious Victory. God bless our noble soldiers, and protect them from this miserable bad weather -
        Tate and Cousin Sallie both very much disapointed not being able to go to Memphis. Laura and I as usual sat up late. I drew the pattern on my swiss to braide , she ruffling her Apron - I finished the book of Luke.