April, Friday 1, 1864
        A gloomy day, raining, cold, and dreary. I have managed to exist, have not done much sewing. I came to my room after dinner, and spent the evening reading the Caxton's - although quite an old book, I have never read it. I began with high expectations, and recommendations, as Bulwer's best - must confess I was greatly disapointed . I think 'What will he do with it ?' is one of the best novels I ever read - with that as my last remembrance of Bulwer, it would scarce be expected I could admire old Mr. Caxton's eccentric disposition, or Ladie Caxton's great lack of spirit, through fear of her liege lord - Beulah was my companion - I could not listen to her distressed whine, unfastened her chain, she went out as I came to my room after tea, and has not yet returned. I fear they will all get into trouble, poor Beulah, she is my best friend, but I do not think she has many friends outside of my own little room. Laura and Bettie said a very good lesson - Laura and Tippie Dora both asleep. No late news from Forrest. I am so lonely, how long oh! Lord, how long must I wait -
April, Saturday 2, 1864
        Ever memorable and (to me ) sad day. I was awakened this morning by the
pitious howl of poor Fosco - as I feared when Beulah left the room, they all killed seven sheep last night. Uncle Elum knocked Fosco in the head, Beulah ran to my room, thereby saving her life - Father sent for her, and then came for her - but oh! he knew not what he asked - to give my dog - my best friend - my Beulah, who had so often defended me in danger, my only protector in the dead hour of night - to drive her from my side, to be murdered. I would as soon thought of kneeling myself on the block, as to see my best friend. Father positively forbid my takeing her off - I hope God will forgive me for the disobedience, but I was obliged to do it. Mary Robinson and Joe Smith took her to Memphis in the buggy to Ed and Rhoda. I know they will love her - none of them sympathise or appreciate the sorrow it gave me to part with poor Beulah. Old Wright's drunken son has been prowling all over the place tonight, shot Ben's dog, Edmondson's battery both white and black started after him, met him in the lane, he cocked his gun and flourished it - cowardly dog, sneaked off after that. Laura, Tip and I all alone, oh! my poor, poor Beulah, how can I do without you -



April, Sunday 3, 1864
        This has been a sad and lonely day for me - I miss my poor Beulah so much. Tippie Dora has not come tonight, so Laura and I are all alone. Tate, Joanna, Nannie, Robert, and Uncle Elum all went to Church. Father went up to Mr. Hildebrand's, Helen was at home, spent the morning in her own room. My sainted Mother, how different from what you wished, to see your two youngest
born so widely separated, both in thought & feeling - it is not my fault, I pine for a companion, yet she is happier with those of her choice -
        I spent the morning in Father's big chair, reading. I read the book of Romans, Father returned but had no news. We have not heard from Forrest since he crossed the Cumberland at Eddyville. God grant us success throughout the State, and return my Bro safe to us once again. I spent the morning alone, grieving for my lost friend - just one week ago this eve I had a long walk, with her as companion, but now I, oh! it makes no difference to any one but myslef, why do I thus complain. A hard storm of rain and wind is raging. Laura learning her lesson. Bettie did not come tonight. Father of mercy give me hope, brighten my life, oh! give me a companion, or my mind is lost. Thy will, not mine oh! Lord be done - Tip just arrived



April, Monday 4, 1864
        The days now passing are of so much paine and unhappiness to me, it is with the greatest difficulty I can have patience at night to make a record of my sad life. The weather today as gloomy as my feelings - cold and drizzling. Anna Nelson spent the morning, I went in to sit with her, did not stay long - oh! for happiness and peace - there is no love or sympathy for me there. I did not sit in the Parlor long after Tea - Father retired early - Laura and Bettie had a very good lesson - Laura now deep in slumber. Tippie Dora in bed asleep, but my poor Beulah, alas, the best of friends must part - I am alone, all alone, there is a mournful spell in the heart echo of that simple word, even when it bounds through the warm blood of youth! - I have thought until my brain feels like a burning fire - it
s 1 o'clock, yet where is sleep or rest for my weary spirit - oh! heavenly Father, have I not suffered enough - remove this trouble, and if I am not humble then return it to me. Oh! try me once again, bless me and brighten my hopes - and guide and lead me in the paths of Righteousness.



April, Tuesday 5, 1864
        I was awakened at daylight by a servant with a note from Miss Hudson who has succeeded in getting all she wants out of Memphis, and promised to take the things I had for Mrs. Hudson to her. I regreted not having all the things through the lines, but sent what I had - Although awakened, I did not think it too late to take a nice little nap - which thanks to Laura lasted until 10 o'clock. Breakfast I have no taste for, yet as Laura brought it to my room, I tried to treat it with politeness -
        Nannie, Helen and Father were all gone to the funeral of Mrs. Barton's little girl. I spent the remainder of the morning alone, met all at dinner, no deffinite news, some say Forrest has returned, I think though tis only prisoners sent through - Sewed some today, all together a dull, lonely time. Tip and Laura as usual asleep - I thinking, and wondering when I can be relieved - God be with me, Guide, protect and make me a christian -



April, Wednesday 6, 1864
        Laura awakened me this morning with the news that Beulah was at my door - oh! it seems there is always something to trouble me. Father allowed her to be chained, and so far has not killed her. We were very much
surprised this morning by the arrival of five of Forrest's men - Eddie & Elb leading the advance, while Capt. Jim Barber, Capt. Farrell & Mr. John Kirk brought up the rear - oh! I was so happy, we have spent a delightful day, have taken it time about standing Picket, with the horses hid in the woods - Geo. Anderson came running up, had just had a nice race with the Yankees - in a little while Joanna & Nannie came from town with the news the Yanks were camping on Horn Lake creek tonight, having heard Forrest had a good many of his men in here on leave - they will have to be right smart if they get our five, with the assistance of Edmondson's battery for Pickets - We all sat up very late, I left them in the Parlor - tis so much happiness to see so many of our Rebel friends - oh! I am happy, yet miserable, my heart is never free from pain, have mercy upon me, oh! my savior, guide and give me happiness -



April, Thursday 7, 1864
        I feel dull and stupid this morning - We have had a happy day, although the Yankees are still down the road.
        Tate and Nannie went to the Pickets this morning, were turned back, the lines closed. Capt. Barber & Mr. Kirk cannot get their things. I had not the heart to see them disapointed , so rob'd old Mr. McMahon of 2d. Mo. Mr. Kirk took his Boots, Capt. Barber his uniform. I will get him more through the lines before he comes for them. I beat Capt. Farrell two games of Chess tonight, Father let us sit up just as late as we wanted to, and we had a delightful evening. Nannie &c very buisy sewing all day. Nannie & I made two shirts for a Kentucky'n who is so far from home, and no one
to take an interest in his need. I sent him a pair of Pants too -
        Joanna, Helen, & Tate made Eddie two - oh! I would give anything if I had it in my power to give them everything they need.
        My poor Beulah is fast asleep at my feet, tomorrow I must give her up again, thank heavens Father is not going to kill her. All my little household all quiet in slumber.



April, Friday 8, 1864
        A bright and beautiful day, yet a lonely one, our Rebel friends left us - and my poor Beulah was taken away again. Helen & Nannie went over to Mr. Harbut's, and took her to Willie Duke. Capt. Barber, Capt. Farrell, Mr. Kirk, Eddie and Elb went over on the Plank Road nearly to Nonconnah, did not see any Yanks, heard of a squad going into Memphis just before them, they came back just before dinner, did not have time to wait, as Laura was just done churning, they drank heartily of Buttermilk. I made them each a nice julep, they went off in fine spirits, yet I can never answer for one sad heart they left behind. I went to sleep after dinner, and slept until very late. Poor Mr. Noe, just two years today since he was wounded - I decked his grave with flowers, and his suffering during the eleven weeks I nursed him, after his wound, until the time of his death, were ever present in my mind. Father and I sat in the Parlor a short time after supper. Laura and Bettie worried me a great deal with their lesson. Poor Beulah, I miss her so much - will my troubles never cease, hope is my Talisman - every dark cloud hath it's silvery lining -
April, Saturday 9, 1864
        What strange weather. cold, bitter cold & raining. Laura awakened me with the news that Lieut. Buchanon of 2 Mo. Cav. with two of his men were here. I hastened to dress, as I expected they would have some news - they came here last night about 6 o'clock to see if we could tell them anything about the Pickets. I dressed and went in the Parlor, he did not stay very long, had twenty men with him on an expedition to capture Cav Pickets - I regreted to learn from him this morning they had failed - they took french leave, we thought we heard the Yanks coming, they did not get this far, rob'd poor old Mr. Isbell of all his meat, and a great deal of corn, - fourteen in the squad, how I wish those Mo's could have known it in time to have captured them. Oh! mercy, I am so lonely - have not sewed much today, sat in the Parlor with Father a little while after tea. Poor Father, his heart is as sad as my own. L. & B. did not say a lesson tonight. Laura, Tip and I all alone, poor, poor Beulah - I sat up very late, alone, ah! the hearts echo of that simple word.



April, Sunday 10, 1864
        Oh! what a relief to the weary, aching brain, when there seems naught for which to live; when this beautiful earth holds no joy; when the glorious sunsets, with their rose tinted clouds have no beauty; when our lifes barks seem drifting ceaselessly on, and we are powerless for good or ill - oh! what a relief to lie down, and closing our eyes, forget it all. To feel that at least while we slumber the scorpion-sting of memory is robbed of it's poison, - the goading, burning lash of human thought stayed, - and then comes a day, glareing again, - and so it goes on to the bitter end. We are all alike in this wicked human world. Let us strive as we will to soar
above it, at last it all comes back to us - human hearts full of passion, love, and beauty - full of sin, sorrow, and suffering; the world overflowing with good and ill. Sometimes in life our value is appreciated, and we can claim true, affectionate, friends, - meet with lofty, generous souls, whose very beings thrill with instinctive love for the whole human race; but mostly we are not understood until the flowers and shadowy, green grass bloom and fade above us, and we lie mute below. Such is my life, how long it must be, no matter, God in his own good time will brighten my life. A beautiful day. Col. Perkins and Jimmie Greer spent the day with us, Helen & Nannie came home. I finished Corinthians - Father and all of us sat in the Parlor after tea. Laura & Bettie said a very good lesson. I am as usual alone, my two companions fast in slumber. God grant peace, we humbly crave, give us our liberty and make us a christian land. God bless my Brothers -



April, Monday 11, 1864
        Helen, Father, the children and myself spent the day alone, the rest all in Memphis. Joanna came home, succeeded in getting Father's permit for supplies, brought no late news. Miss Perdue & Noble banished, leave tomorrow. I expect I will be next. I was so happy to hear Miss Em is expected today, my future plans depend upon her advice. Tate & Nannie staid in M. all night. Col. Overton came to see us today, just up from Dixie, - everybody hopeful and confident of a bright day soon. Mr. McMahon, 2d. Mo Cav came this eve. I was so disapointed about letting his things go - though he seemed perfectly satisfied, as he had replenished his wardrobe
from Yankee Prison in Grierson's raids, he has been quite sick, is now on his way to Camp at Jackson, Tenn - he has his fine horse again. God grant him a safe journey, for he is a splendid Soldier. Gen. Armstrong with his brigade at Water Valley moving up - Ah! God is just, and I feel that we have not suffered in vain. We humbly pray for a cessation of this horrible war, oh! give us our independence & peace - We all sat in the parlor right late, Mr. Mc went further below. Tip & Laura both sleep, poor Beulah, I wonder where she is -



April, Tuesday 12, 1864
        Mr. Jim Rogers arrived from Texas today, he and Mr. Farrer came over, Col. Perkins, Jimmie Greer and Col. Overton spent the day. Capt. Bissel was here, left two Pistols for me to take care of until he came back the last of the week. I went with Col. Overton over to Mr. Bray's, he took me to protect him from the Yankees, we had a terible trip, he went on down to Col. Perkins, we heard there was a Yankee Negro Soldier dead on Day's Creek, so Bettie, Kate, Robert and Mary & myself started in search. We found him, and it was an awful sight, he was in the Water in full uniform, his napsack on the bank of the creek, oh! I would give anything if I had not seen it. I have not done any sewing, house full of Company all day. I received a letter from Maj. Price and Mrs. Hudson, one to forward from Dixie, two from Memphis, one for Mr. Sam Wilson, one from Mo. to be forwarded to a Soldier to Mo. Brigade - No later news from Forrest, the Yanks in Memphis are frightened to death, think he is coming there. Miss Em has not come, I was so disapointed . Tate and Nannie got home. Bettie and Laura had a very good lesson -


April, Wednesday 13, 1864
        This has indeed been an exciting day, heavy fireing all last night & this morn. Forrest has captured Fort Pillow - still in his possession up to this evening dispatches captured on yesterday, the fireing we heard was between the Fort and Gun Boats, the Yanks in Memphis are frightened to death - a squad of 15 came and made us feed them and their horses - staid here nearly three houres , hateful old thieves. I wish a squad of Confederates had come and captured the last one of them - they stole Mr. Wither's horses - Late this evening 9 of our soldiers passed the gate, too late to get those rogues, yet I think we will hear from them on Nonconnah very soon -
        Tate, Annie Nelson and Joanna, with Uncle Elum and the wagon went to town, succeeded in getting through Father's supplies and a good many things, the Yanks stole three hats out of the wagon in Nonconnah bottom, oh! how I hate them - Col. Overton came, Nannie went down to Col. Perkins with him. Mr. Henry Nelson & Mr. J. Hilderbrand came to see us after tea. I have not sewed much today. L. & B. said no lesson. Thank God for the glorious news today - oh! that my Bro may be safe.



April, Thursday 14, 1864
        A comparitively quiet day to yesterday, cold, cloudy and disagreeable. I have spent it with little use to myself, or any one else - done no sewing at all. Mr. Rogers spent the day with us, brought no late news. Col. Overton and Anna Perkins came after dinner, staid a very short while - Anna Nelson & Rebecka Robinson came by and borrowed a horse to go to Memphis - we did not hear whether they returned or not - indeed we have heard nothing
reliable today. Father heard a rumor this evening that our Virginia Gen. (Robert Lee) had ruined the left wing of Grant's Army - God grant it may be so. Grant is a fool to think he can whip Gen. Lee. Gen. Stephen Lee is at LaGrange, Gen. Forrest still at Fort Pillow last account we had. God grant we may humbly receive the blessings which have brightened our little Confederacy, drive this wicked band from our Sunny land, give us liberty and peace - oh! make us a Christian nation - we have suffered, yet we deserved thy punishment, we humbly crave thy pardon, and beseech thy blessings - The night spent as usual with me, sit in the Parlor with Father a short while after Tea.



April, Friday 15, 1864
        Today I have spent sewing, all for nothing, tried the waiste on tonight and it will not fit at all. I am so disapointed . Mr. Mancoat came this evening from Memphis. Forrest still holds Fort Pillow, the Yanks are frightened to death in Memphis, how I wish we could get possession of our City once more - navigation of the Mississippi above blockaded for the present, and I hope, forever to the Yankees - they have begun to forage on the Country, supplies rather short in Memphis. Just as I was wondering what there was in this day, worth recording, Kate came in and announced to my great surprise, Margaret had a baby. I left her Cabin about an hour ago, she said she had not felt well, and asked me to bring the little Goslins in my room. I have not heard how they are getting along - no one with her except Bettie, Harriet, and Myra. I did not stay in the Parlor
long after Tea. Laura and I have spent the evening nursing the Goslins. We heard the sad news that Mr. Gates and Mr. Cy Smith were both dead, belonged to Henderson's Scouts, captured at a party, died in Alton Prison. Oh! so many of our bravest and best young men are passing away. God spare my Brothers, and bring them safe to the heart of my poor old Father.



April, Saturday 16, 1864
        Another day of excitement - about 30 Yanks passed early this morning, only six came in for their breakfast, they did not feed their horses - they behaved very well, and seemed to be gentlemen, in fact we so seldom see gentlemen among the Yankees that we can appreciate them when they are met with. While the squad with us were sitting on the porch, the squad which went to Mr. Hildebrand's passed with two of his horses, which they were takeing to Memphis. Anna Nelson came down this morning, the Chicago Times of 12th. has a good letter in it from X - Forrest has left Fort Pillow, having accomplished all he went for - we have not heard where he is or what his movements are, yet are perfectly satisfied that we will have good news from him in a day or two.
        Margaret and baby both doing well, she says I may name it, so I have named her "Dixie." Mr. Rodgers came over this evening. Hal was down today but did not come to see us. We have no news of importance today, I have had a great deal of trouble with my Goslins. Sewed some little, yet feel that I have spent the day with little profit to myself, or anyone else, - beat Tate playing Chess tonight - my little room as usual, my Lamp all right again.
April, Sunday 17, 1864
        For what? am I liveing ? - why is it that I am spared from day to day with no happiness myself, and I am sure my poor weary life adds not moiety of pleasure and happiness to any one in this household. Oh! give me strength, give me patience my blessed redeemer, to receive thy punishment with meekness and humbleness - and faith that in thy own good time all will be well -
        Tate and Helen with the children went down to Col. Perkins to spend the day, came home this evening in the rain. Col. Overton came this evening, did not stay many minutes, went to Col. Perkins to meet his friends -
        Father, Joanna and I have spent the day alone, indeed I have been all alone, only saw them at dinner - read two books in the Bible - Galations & Ephesians - We heard Forrest had Columbus, Ky, can't vouch for the correctness of the report - God grant it may be so, and that Eddie is safe - Laura and Bettie said a very good lesson tonight - My Goslins have given me a great deal of trouble - did not stay in the Parlor long after Tea - spent the evening alone as usual, Laura & Tip both sleep - My poor Beulah, I wonder where she is tonight - how much I miss & grieve for her, no one cares, or knows -



April, Monday 18, 1864
        Well, I expect our days of peace and quiet are over, another squad of Yanks passed - four stoped here, staid until after dinner, and went on back to Memphis - all of them, except one, seemed to be gentlemen, this one was a black abolitionist, oh! how I heartily despise him - I promised to make
a Confederate Flag for one of them, Mr. Greer, and he promised he would not reenlist, so I have spent the evening making one, and will give it next time he comes. We were fortunate in their visit, they only ate their Dinner - Forrest was fighting at Columbus, Ky. on yesterday, no particulars. God grant he was successful, and my Bro. is safe.
        I have sewed all day, yet not accomplished much - did not stay in the Parlour long after Tea, - no use in my recording why.
        Laura and Bettie are improving very fast, recited a very good lesson tonight. The Goslins are a great deal of trouble, Laura and they are fast asleep on her pallet -
        My Mother, oh! my Mother, how long must I leave thee, my heart yearns for thy sympathy, thy advice. Oh! God have mercy on me - No news from my dear Miss Em - oh! hasten her arrival - I shudder for my mind - Oh! my dear, my beautiful Savior, have mercy on me -



April, Tuesday 19, 1864
        No Yanks today, a heavy raide passed down on Pigeon Rooste Road, do not know their destination. No news from Forrest, and the Yanks do not seem to know where he is. We have not seen any one today, or heard a word of news. Joanna and Bettie went to Memphis today, Sallie went with them - got a Permit - I am going to try my luck in the City tomorrow. I scarcely know what to think about it, or expect, but I do not believe all I have heard. Father is not willing I should go, I must change though, I cannot live always thus. Sewed all day, finished my white wrapper. My poor little burnt Goslin died, I have a great deal of trouble with them.
 Bettie and Laura did not say a lesson tonight, Bettie said she was too tired, and it was not five minutes until Laura was asleep - I am right sick tonight, and so lonely. No news from Miss Em yet, I am very much afraid she will give up her visit -
        Forrest keeps so buisy on the Miss. River - The days of my present life are not worth recording - and I am sure the trouble and sorrow are indelibly ground on my memory and heart -



April, Wednesday 20, 1864
        Tate and I arrived in Memphis quite early, put the horse up, then walked up street together, met Nannie and Anna Perkins. Nannie gave me two letters, one from St. Louis to Mrs. Welch, an exile in La Grange, Ga. one from New York from a stranger, asking assistance to through me to communicate with Mrs. Van Hook at Selma, Ala - I received a letter from Maj. Price at Selma, by Mrs. Flaherty. I dined with Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Kirk - went round for Hat after dinner, she went with me to see Capt. Woodward, to know what I must do in regard to an order which I heard was issued for my arrest - he advised me to keep very quiet until he could see the Provost Marshall and learn something in regard to it. I came to Mrs. Facklen's, although she has a house full of Yankees boarding with her - they seem to be very gentlemanly, Dr. Irwin and Dr. Sommers, the latter has his family, Wife and two children - We spent a pleasant evening at Chess &c. Mrs. Facklen has been very fortunate in her selection of boarders -



April, Thursday 21, 1864
        I went round according to appointment, met Capt. Woodward at 11 o'clock.
Col. Patterson went with me. Capt. W. had not seen the Provost Marshall, he went as soon as I left, came round to Mrs. Facklen's after dinner, and brought bad news - though having approached Capt. Williams as aid for a heroine of Jericho, he could not treat me as the order read - it was issued from old Hurlbut, I was to be arrested and carried to Alton on first Boat that passed - for carrying letters through the lines, and smugling , and aiding the Rebelion in every way in my power - he sent me word I must not think of attending Jennie Eave's wedding, or go out of doors at all, he would be compelled to arrest me if it came to him Officially, but as my Father was a Royal Arch Mason, and I a Mason, he would take no steps, if I would be quiet. Mrs. Facklen, Mr. & Mrs. Goodwyn, Mr. Leach and Dr. Irwin all went to the wedding - I staid at home, and spent the evening with Mrs. Summers, and the Dr. They were very pleasant, and not the least bitter in their feeling towards the South, ah! but they are Yankees, I can't forget it when with them.



April, Friday 22, 1864
        All ready for breakfast this morning, notwithstanding the late hour of retiring last night - they all spent a delightful evening - the Bride looked beautiful, the groom charming, and all passed as merry as a marriage bell - It was a great disapointment to me, but rather too much risk, a trip to Alton would not be very pleasant. I ventured with a thick vail on, to go up town this morning and purchase me a few articles which I would be compelled to have if I am banished, only went to one store - Went to see Mrs. Worsham and Vine sent some letters to St. Louis to Mrs. Moore's from
her husband. Anna Nelson came after me, but the detectives have been looking for me today, and I was afraid to pass the Pickets. I have certainly escaped wonderfully. Mrs. Sommers seemed very much distressed that I could not get through - we spent a very pleasant evening. Dr. Sommers and Mr. Goodwyn discussing the war, I enjoyed it very much, no anger or hard words, they both agreed to disagree, beat Mr. Clark three games of Chess, - did not sit up very late. I am miserable for fear old Gibbert gets me at the Pickets tomorrow. God grant I may get through safe -



April, Saturday 23, 1864
        All ready for breakfast, and very much refreshed after a good nights sleep. Dr. Sommers leaves for Vicksburgh today, inspecting hospitals. I would not care if they had no hospitals, however he is very agreeable. I prepared for my trip directly after breakfast. Mrs. Sommers came in the room and seemed very much distressed that I was in trouble, and said that she would get the Dr. to get me a pass if I would wait until he came. I knew it was of no use to ask, the Provost Marshall said I must not, but consoled me by saying, where there is a will there is generally a way. This was hint enough, so I went to Mrs. Worsham's, and Kate went round to the Provost's Office and got a pass for herself and Miss Edmunds. I shall ever be grateful to her for it. I then started for Mr. Barbier's, came by and told Mr. Eyrich goodbye - came by Miss Perdue's, found Miss Mary & Annie just having their baggage searched to leave for Vicksburgh - banished never to return. I got through Pickets safe, Jack was on. Anna Nelson came out with me, we were caught in a terible storm, no trouble otherwise, found all well at home.


April, Sunday 24, 1864
        This has been a terible day of excitement, two wagons from Memphis came out and camped in front of our gate all day, the Yanks did not bother them this morning only to take some Whiskey - two Confederate Soldiers were sitting in the Parlor all the time they were here, they did not see them coming in time to run, but fortunately they did not come in the Parlor. Mr. Falls and Miss McKinney, Sister of one of the Soldiers, came out to see them, the other Soldier was Mr. Hutchinson. I sent a package of Papers and letters to Mobile by Mr. McKinney, they had not more than rode out of sight when five Yanks came up all drunk, they robbed those people with the wagons of all their money, drank up all the whiskey and treated them shamefully, they had not been gone long before three Confederates, John & William Hildebrand and Ben Henderson came riding up, we told them about it, they rode off full speed, in a little while we heard firing, continued about five minutes, then all quiet. Father and Uncle Elam went down to Dave Hildebrand's after tea, our boys just left all right, - they met the Yanks returning, only four, and they frightened to death almost - no particulars. I am very much afraid, Laura, the Goslins, Tip and I all alone.



April, Monday 25, 1864
        Father went first thing this morning to see if he could not hear something more about those thieving Yankees, - could not hear whether the Confederate squad gained anything or not - they went down to poor old Mr. Isbell's and beat him nearly to death because he would not show them the way to the plank road. Father and Mr. Madden went down there this evening


to see him, a squad of Yankees passed, only two came in to get some buttermilk. Luce was one, we told him how those had acted yesterday, he reported it ti the Officer, and Father said they stoped at Mr. Isbell's and enquired very particularly about it, and said he would have the men arrested. Miss Annie Perdue, Sister and Bro. all sent through the lines today, banished. Washburn countermanded Hurlbut's order and sent them by land, instead of River. Miss Annie came over to see us, and get me to go over the creek for her. Father is rather afraid, but I will try it in the morning - though I expect not, Father has just left my room, and says he is afraid for me to go - I am so unhappy about the trouble I have got in - oh! what is to become of me, what is my fate to be - A poor miserable exile -
        Poor Tip is very sick, and I am very much afraid she is going to die - the Goslins are well, Laura and I complete my lonely little household -



April, Tuesday 26, 1864
        I arose very early this morning, Father was not willing I should go over the creek, went over to Mr. Farrer's to tell Miss Annie Perdue so she would make other arrangements about sending for them. I was so distressed to think she must be so disapointed , and I did not get to see her again. No Yankees out on our road today, all very quiet until this eve. We were all very much excited, surprised & happy to see Maj. Crump, he is just from Jackson, Tenn, where Gens. Forrest and Chalmers still have their Hd. Qts. Lee's Cavalry have gone to Ala. to check the raid advancing by way of Decatur - John Hildebrand and Henry Nelson came down and spent the evening with us - John Hildebrand beat me badly at Chess again - we have had a very pleasant
evening with our Rebel friends, in spite of Yankee visits -
        Father retired very early, all left the Parlor except Maj. Crump and Helen. Poor child, may God shield her from all dark clouds, oh! may she never feel or know the anguish which has been mine. God grant them a happy and peaceful union.
        Tip is still quite sick, Laura and the Goslins have retired, - my poor lost Beulah, I wonder where she is tonight - and me, poor miserable being - oh! heavenly Father, have mercy and brighten my lonely life -



April, Wednesday 27, 1864
        Tate and Nannie started to Memphis very early this morning, got back home without any trouble, and Tate was fortunate enough to get a permit, and kind enough to me, to bring what few things I had to me. No news, except they are just reallizing the terrible thrashing they received in La.
        Maj. Crump went to the woods this morning, did not come in again until late this evening. Laura and I have been very buisy all day cleaning and arranging my room for summer, I had a splendid bath, and enjoyed it very much. The day has been so warm and disagreeable, tried one of my new white wrappers, first change of the season - Two of Henderson's Scouts came here after dark, Mr. Benson and Alexander, got their supper and fed their horses - did not stay long, sent a bundle of papers and letters to Capt. Henderson by them. Four soldiers came in after Tea - the same who broke up the abandoned farm, (Ball's) Saturday night, and I think they are on such an errand tonight, did not stay long, only until the storm passed over - Yanks - three passed this evening, did not stop. All my household quiet in slumber -
April, Thursday 28, 1864
        Maj. Crump left for the bushes early this morning, did not return until the rain began, he sat in my room until supper was ready, Helen, Tate and Nannie have all been out here all evening buisy sewing on Maj. C shirts. I finished mine before the storm came up. Mr. Wesson came after Mr. Wallace's things, he has not left yet, will start in the morning -
        Seven Yankees and a cotton buyer came today just after dinner - did not harm anything, only wanted some milk, and to know the way to the plank road - we were very fortunate once again - they did not even come in the house. We have not heard a word of news today - all spent the evening together in the Parlor, Music &c. I beat Maj. Crump at Chess. Father & Mr. Wesson retired early. I sat up right late, trying to get Mary to sleep, succeeded at last, left Nannie, Helen and Maj. Crump in Parlor, found Laura sleep in the chair with her work in her lap - Tip had not arrived - the Goslins taking their lunch - and I, poor miserable being, praying for strength, and patience, for thy will, oh! Lord - Tate had a letter from Eddie & Capt. Barber -



April, Friday 29, 1864
        Joanna and Nannie went to Memphis early this morning, and have not returned yet, Father is very uneasy about them for fear they are in trouble with the Yankees - none have been out today. Maj. Crump spent the day in the woods again - another storm this evening which bro't him home rather early, he came in my room where we were all buisy sewing - Tate is making
Capt. Barber's shirts, - Helen buisy getting ready to go South - which she thinks will be about the first of June. I have made "Dixie" five dresses, and have one to make yet, then I will have fulfilled my agreement for the privilage of naming her - Mr. Crawford spent the day with us, waiting for Nannie - Mr. Wesson left early this morning with his goods - we have no late, reliable news today. All spent the evening together in the Parlor. Father and I retired early, left Tate, Helen and Maj. Crump is there. All my little household together - Poor Beulah, I will always miss her.



April, Saturday 30, 1864
        Laura brought my breakfast to my room - very late - everybody slept late this morning - Raining, raining, raining - oh! such a gloomy day as it has been. Joanna & Nannie have not come yet. Nonconnah is swimming, but Father is miserable for fear that is not what keeps them.
        Maj. Crump left about 10 o'clock, we have not heard how he got through, but heard of no scouts, and reckon he is all right, some where in Panola tonight. Mr. Bray brought Nannie a letter from Dashiell, all of the fords on Nonconnah are heavily picketed - the Gurrilla's ambushed a scouting party of fourteen, at Pigeon Rooste crossing on yesterday, killing the Yankee's three horses - wounding two Yanks and capturing three and one horse, only six out of the crowd got back to Memphis - they are very much exasperated - the lines have been closed since, and that may have detained the girls - hurrah! for the Dick Davis and his band - I hope they may
break into this thieving band of Yanks roving over the Country - both of Helen's little pups died today -
        God bless our armies and give us success -