January, Friday 1, 1864
        'Tis New Year, a happy one to our household. Lieut. Spotswood and Eddie came last night. Poor Eddie is greatly in need of clothes.
        I do not think we will have much trouble in out Gen'ling the Yanks. I have $50. G.B. left I intend to devote to that purpose. It is very cold, all nature is robed in Ice.
        Notwithstanding the Yanks are such near neighbors, we have had a house full of Rebels all day, four of Henderson's Scouts - Lieut. S. Eddie, Jim & Elb Jeters. Nannie and I went in the buggy over to the smugler's, Joe White, to see if we could not get some things there for Eddie, failed, bro't Lute some soap - almost froze to death - got home at dark, all just finishing dinner, had a splendid time tonight. Our Armys all seem to be Status Quo. God grant successful may be the termination of 1864 - oh! my savior I have buried the past - guide and leade me from temptation. After you, my God, then I live for my Country - God bless our leaders in Dixie.



January, Saturday 2, 1864
        Bettie and Uncle Elum went in town this morning horse-back. I sent $50. to Mr. Armstrong to get Eddie's suite of clothes and other articles which he needs. Poor Soldiers, this bitter cold weather I wish I had money to buy every thing they need -
        Lieut. Spotswood went with two of Henderson's Scouts over Nonconnah to Mr. Deadrick's to get them to bring him every thing he needs out - they promised to do so. It has been sleeting all day - three of the Bluff City's
called this evening, got their dinner, warmed and went on over Nonconnah. Cousin Frazor came this evening, and we have a house full - they are all Rebels, and we always have room for them if a hundred would come. All we can do is to sit round the fire, laugh, talk and try to keep warm. Bettie and Uncle Elum have not returned yet. I feel very uneasy, as she is to smuggle Eddie's clothes. Tate is out of humor, Eddie is troubled, but I think it will all be right - yet suspense is terrible -



January, Sunday 3, 1864
        Another day has passed, and not one word from Bettie or Uncle Elum - no communication with Memphis today, too cold to go out side of the doors. Still sleeting - house still full, if not a little fuller. Tate is growing very impatient to leave for Dixie - she is really cross about Bettie, but I still have hope that it will be all right. Eddie feels badly about it, as the risk was run for him - God bless the Rebels. I would risk my life a dozen times a day to serve them - think what they suffer for us -
        Henny Furgeson and Lieut. Spotswood left for Dixie. Henny F. bought Helen's pony, gave $200. for it, he rode it off - It does not seem like the Sabbath, though this is the first one of '64. We spent the day as usual, laughing, talking, and trying to keep warm. Julien Simmons and Dashiell Perkins came over from Col. Perkins - Dashiell staid we sat up very late, and Poor old - looks like the noise will run him crazy.



January, Monday 4, 1864
        I always try to see the bright side of every picture. I have never


given up hope but Bettie would come right side up - and I think she is a star darkie - she and Uncle Elum arrived safely at home. Bettie was loaded with contraband - Eddie a suit of clothes, pr Boots, Gauntlets, socks - blacking, and in fact everything he sent for - he is so grateful and real proud of all his things. Laura gave him the Gauntlets - he went with me to my room, and I packed his valise, he now has everything in the world he needs - and Company to go South with him, Sam Alexander, one of the Bluff City's came and stoped over night to go on in the morning, old Mr. Jaison with him. Dear Eddie, this is his last night with us, we all sat up very late. Weather gloomy, bitter cold, ground still covered with Snow.



January, Tuesday 5, 1864
        Still cold, cloudy and gloomy, has not moderated at all, it is real dangerous traveling, the ground covered with Ice.
        Eddie has on his new suit, ready to leave for camp. Mr. Alexander and old Mr. Jayson are going with him, and we are better satisfied - I would not have him stay any longer for any thing, I am perfectly disgusted at the way in which our soldiers are lying about, shirking their duty. Eddie has everything to make him comfortable for this winter -
        Two more of the Bluff City's arrived, got their dinner, warmed, and went on over Nonconnah. Our house still full, we have a gay time picketing fir the Yankees, but I expect the boys think they have a gayer one running in the cold at their appearance - As usual we all sat up very late.
January, Monday 11, 1864
                        Like a weary actor in a play,
                       Like a phantom in a dream,
                       Like a lost boat left to stray
                       Rudderless adown the stream -
                       This is what my life has grown, -
                       Since thy false heart left me lone, -
                       And I wonder sometimes when the laugh is loud,
                       And I wonder at the faces of the crowd,
                       And the strange fantastic measures that they tread, -
                       Till I think at last, till I half believe I an dead.