October, Saturday 1, 1864
        Awakened at daylight, and all my hurrying could not get Mr. Carr off until rather late - reached my friends Mrs. Barr's to breakfast, and spent a very pleasant day, but very impatient to get on - have not as yet succeeded in getting any conveyance -


October, Sunday 2, 1864
        Awakened very late, after a feverish, restless night. Emma and I started out to get a conveyance - Mr. Bacon and Mr. Allexander of Henderson's Scouts proved my friends, borrowed a buggy, and Mr. Johnson, one of their Company, Brother in law of Maj. Ingraham's, on Cheatham's Staff, brot me safely to Panola - arrived here about 7 o'clock. Mrs. Moore sick in bed, but glad to see me, so Mr. Johnson and I ate a hearty supper, and I am fixing for a hot toddy - think my cold will be relieved and save me from a spell - Got in too late, disapointed in seeing Gen. Chalmers tonight -



October, Monday 3, 1864
        Was rather despondent some time this morning. Gen. Chalmers came at last, gave me a pass. Mr. Lancaster carried me to the train, where I met Brother Brodie coming up to Senatobia for Helen, we traveled on the horse cars - and of course were some time making the trip. Helen did not come, not a word from her. I am so impatient to go on, but will have to wait here until she arrives. I wrote a long letter to dear Lou tonight, Maj. C. added a postcript -



October, Tuesday 4, 1864
        Gloomy, Gloomy and dismal, raining all day. Maj. Crump and I both impatient, but no Helen - he staid most of his time in Telegraph Office. Mrs. Chalmers came, and I had to share my room with her and Kate. I am so impatient to get home. Nothing of importance - crowd continually passing -
October, Wednesday 5, 1864
        I arose rather delighted haveing an opportunity of going home, however we got started very late. Mr. & Mrs. Greenlaw & I left Senatobia about 9 o'c got to Cold Water ferry where the Pickets would not pass us without a special pass. Of course we were very much disapointed , but such is the fate of mankind, disapointments , reached Senatobia rather late in the day, found Gen. Chalmers and his command at that place. Gen. C. had taken my place, so I had to sleep with old Mrs. Arnold. Eddie and a great many friends were with Gen. C. they are ready for a raide somewhere, - I think towards Memphis, as the lines North are closed -



October, Thursday 6, 1864
        Gen. Chalmers kindly gave me a pass this morning, so I took passage in Dr. Bullington's Cart for home, had no trouble as far as Hernando, arrived there about 1 o'clock, was delayed some time in getting a driver to go on - finally I got a little boy about 10 years old, we started off, but soon found obstructions at Huricane Creek two miles above Hernando, met with our Pickets, and they would allow no one to pass. Old Mr. Nesbit was there and saw how disapointed I was, and whispered to me if I would go back and get a saddle he would assist me in running the pickets. I succeeded in getting everything myself on one horse, the little boy on the other, rode 16 miles after 4 o'clock, arrived at home by 8. Eddie arrived just before me - oh! I was so happy, but no one glad to see me except Laura -


October, Friday 7, 1864
        Today has been passed at home, buisy enough with me - having all of Laura's things to fix and my own. Nannie and Sister Mary went to Memphis to try and get me out some things, but have not returned. Eddie and all of us sat in Tate's room after supper. Father made Eddie go to the Cotton pen to sleep - he has not had much pleasure at home. I sleep in Sister Mary's room with poor little Sallie - oh! how my heart aches for those poor little Motherless children.
        No Yanks, or any disturbance today -



October, Saturday 8, 1864
        Hal came down this morning to spend the day with me. Helen, Laura and the bagage left about ten o'clock. I will not go until Sister Mary and Nannie come -
        Eddie left early this morning, Capt. Forrest came by for him a few minutes after he left - Gen. Chalmers got in six miles of Memphis, but found out the Yanks were too many, and retreated in good order - Hal did not stay very late, says she is coming to Col. Young's this Winter. Sister Mary and Nannie got home safe - got nearly all I wanted. Oh! I am miserable, poor old Father, how my heart aches to leave him, yet all is ready to go bright and early in the morning.



October, Sunday 9, 1864
        Father came in Sister Mary's room where I was sleeping, before day, and awakened me - I was all ready to start at daylight. The darkies and
Aunt Patsy were the only ones up to bid me Good bye. Sister Mary was up also and helped me to get off. I had no apetite , though Bettie had a nice lunch, had to stop at Mr. Hillston's and borrow a horse and leave Ginnie, she could not pull us, had no difficulty after that. Father rode on the horse almost to Cold Water, and Peter in the buggy with me, we bought corn for the horses and ate dinner about four miles below Hernando. Arrived in Senatobia about 4 o'c, stoped at old Mr. Arnold's. Father went out to Mr. Bowdry's after Tea to get a pass home from Gen. Chalmers. Helen went on to Mr. Wallace's.



October, Monday 10, 1864
        I got up very early for fear of being left, Father went down and saw me safe on the train. I arrived at Como, and no Helen or baggage - concluded to get off. Mr. Sledge carried me over to Mr. Wallace's in his buggy, I found Father there, and Helen waiting for Maj. Crump. Poor Father, oh! my heart aches to part with him - God forgive me, and oh! let me be blessed to see him once again. I feel like it will kill me - my poor aching heart, Father oh! Father, could I only know you regreted my absence oh! God shield him and spare him for my sake - he left early on his way home. May he have a safe and speedy trip. Maj. Crump arrived, so did Eddie.



October, Tuesday 11, 1864
        Gen. Chalmers left this morning for Jackson, Tenn, - the day has been spent rather lazily by me - I have no heart for anything - We cannot go on until Thursday - No news
October, Wednesday 12, 1864
        Nothing more today than yesterday, still at Mr. Wallace's. Good news from Ga. if it only be true - our Army will certainly be blessed. All the soldiers gone to Tenn. and the Country here is gloomy and deserted.



October, Thursday 13, 1864
        Left Mr. Wallace's very early in time for the train at Como. Car crowded, we got aboard after much maneuvering. An unpleasant trip to Talehatchie, reached the other train in Safety, were delayed some time in Panola to take a Battery aboard, (Thrawl's) - had a pleasant, but slow trip down, did not reach Grenada until after night. Mr. Payne did not get the Dispatch, so we had to hire an Ambulance, and come out to his house. I have an awful Cold, and my night ride did not help it any. I am comfortably ensconsed in a room to myself, Laura only, shares it - My head aches teribly -



October, Friday 14, 1864
        Gloomy prospect for weather this morning. Bro. Eddie and Mr. Payne went in to Grenada after breakfast, came back to dinner. No news. Bro. B. succeeded in getting an ambulance, but no Mules. I will have to exercise a great deal of patience - but - know he is doing all he can. I am so grateful for his kindness, and the interest he has taken in me. This is a delightful family, and I am thankful Helen has such a nice home. Bro. Brodie has orders to move to Jackson, Tenn. on Sunday. I have suffered very much with my cold, but think it a little better tonight.


October, Saturday 15, 1864
        My trip seems the plans are fully matured, but the clouds are threatening, and I am very much afraid we will have bad weather, if nothing happens, and God's will, I will leave for Pontotoc tomorrow. Bro. Brodie got an Ambulance and Mules from Capt. Mickle, and Mr. Payne will send one of his boys to drive. My cold is much better today. I wrote two letters home - the day has been spent very quietly, but pleasantly. Still no news from the Army -



October, Sunday 16, 1864
        Maj. Crump was up before daylight, and off for his trip to Tenn. I got up also, but did not get off until 9 o'clock. Helen and I came to Grenada in the Carriage. I met the Ambulance at Capt. Mickle's Office, bid farewell to Grenada and my friends at 10 o'clock, Helen returned to Mr. Payne's. I started on my journey to Pontotoc with Laura for a Companion, and old Uncle Thornton, Mr. Payne's Servant, for Driver. We had a very rough trip, got lost, and tonight find ourselves only 20 miles from Grenada - at Mr. Peirson's, five miles from Coffeeville. No Ladie in the house - I have a nice, comfortable room, and do not feel afraid with Laura - hope Uncle Thornton and the Mules are at rest also. Saw Dr. DeHart in Coffeeville this evening -



October, Monday 17, 1864
        Well! here I sit tonight 20 miles from Pontotoc - only traveled 24 miles today, through the poorest Country, and worst roads, I'll wager, in
Dixie, the celebrated Calhoun County. The people are dirty, miserable looking creatures - with no tastes and scarcely any civilization, fortuneately I met with comfortable quarters for the night, at Mr. Sadler's, one mile north of Serepta, a little village, only the name - Banner we passed through abour 4 o'c - oh! misery, I would die if I had to live in such a Country. Our Mules did finely, but poor creatures I know they are as much rejoiced as we are to be over those bad roads. We were lost again today, poor Uncle Thornton has very little idea of routes. I have a clean bed, and nice pine torch - with Laura's company will pass the night very well -



October, Tuesday 18, 1864
        Arrived in Pontotoc after 12, broke down just under the big hill, below Bro. Will's -



October, Thursday 20, 1864
        Uncle Thornton started back to Grenada this morning, I reckon the Ambulance will last until he gets there. I was sorry to send it back to Capt. Mickle broken, but could not avoid it.



October, Sunday 23, 1864
        I left Pontotoc this morning for Waverly - a very warm, unpleasant ride, in a rough Dixie hack. (Spring Wagon) -
        Arrived in Okolona just after sundown. Mrs. Henderson received me very cordially, and I spent a very pleasant eve. Mr. Hubbard, Mr. Vasser


and Mr. Henderson being of the party -



October, Monday 24, 1864
        Up bright and early. Mr. Henderson bro't me down to the Depot - had no trouble, but a very pleasant ride to West Point. Mr. Hamilton met me, and oh! I am so happy to be with my friends once more. Lou and Grand Mother arrived just after the train, and after sitting awhile with Mr. Hamilton, we started on our journey toward Waverly, arrived before dinner. Mr. Willie and Jimmie Young, Maj. Cheatham & Maj. Young arrived soon after from the Brown place with the body of poor old Rannie. I of course am happy. Lu and I went in bathing, but oh! 'twas miserable cold -



October, Tuesday 25, 1864
        Grand Mother left for Ga. today, Mrs. Johnson went to Columbus with her. Lou, Grand Mother & I went up to see Mrs. Hamilton - the day passed as usual, always delightfully for me at Waverly -