July, Friday 1, 1864
        It has been quite pleasant all day, a nice breeze, we spent it alone until this evening, several of our friends from Camp called, Col. Rucker, Col. Overton & Lt. Rodgers from Rucker's Brig, Capt. Leverson, Capt. Mason, Johnie and Decatur from Forrest's Hd. Qts. Maj. Crump arrived from Oxford, he left Helen at Mrs. Goodman's, she has a delightful home, and a nice horse to ride every evening - they all went back to Camp before night except Maj. Crump and John & Decatur, they staid until bed time. We had a delightful time, I am charmed with my new Bro. in law. Oh! my poor weary heart, how I long for some one to sympathize, to advise me, God have mercy. Bless my dear Father and protect his household, bless my dear Bros and Bros in law. I wrote to Shallie Kirk today, the 7th. Tenn and McDonald's Bat'n have orders to move on an hour's notice, the Yanks are very strong in numbers - but God will bless us and crown us with Victory, save our poor boys from privation and danger -
July, Saturday 2, 1864
        We have spent a delightful day, Capt. Barber, Maj. Allen and Lt. Doyle spent the day with us. Robert went to Tupelo with his Papa. Hal's Bro. Frank was to see us. Mr. Pugh returned from his trip with Nannie, brought Mrs. Galloway and Miss Walington with him, he went on to Tupelo, Bruce went in the Ambulance with him. We had a gay time, Mrs. Galloway is as lively as can be. Mr. Galloway, Maj. Crump and Bro. Geo. came out in the Ambulance this evening from Tupelo - poor Maj. he is quite sad that his honeymoon should so early be blighted, however Man proposes, God disposes. No late war news, nor any from home - the Yanks are moveing slowly through the Country, rather shy of Mr. Forrest and his Company. I wonder when this horrible war will be over, if the scenes now passing will be remembered. I must cease for to Night , the Bats are so bad. Hal, Bettie and I have already had a race with one, and hard to say which is the greatest coward.



July, Sunday 3, 1864
        This day will be long remembered. Bro. Geo. & Brodie went to Tupelo early. Hal, Tate and myself, with Bettie and the Children, started to Church at Tupelo in the Ambulance with Alfred to drive us. We got along very well until within a mile of Tupelo, had just passed through the Webfoot Cavalry Camp, saw them on parade and enjoyed the different scenes in Camp, reached the Creek, were undecided for some time whether to go over the bridge, or ford, the latter seemed best, so off we drove, and just entering
the mud hole when the Ambulance upset, with a terible crash - in a few minutes fifty soldiers ran to our rescue, and a Mr. Harris (did not learn his title) who was exceedingly kind. I was first out, Alfred jumped out with Robert as the Ambulance fell, Bettie kept Mary close to her. Tate went on top of Hal, they were all very mudy , no limbs broken. We went on to Hd. Qrs. saw a great many friends, too late for Church, returned to dinner. Eddie and John Cummins spent day with us. Capt. Sheperd, Capt. Barber and Maj. Crump called this eve - we all went to Negro prayer meeting after tea.



July, Monday 4, 1864
        Today is the Anniversary of the decleration of our forefather's independence, one year ago was a sad one for the happiness of our Southern Confederacy, -Vicksburgh surrendered by Pemberton to Grant. Many changes and sad days since that event, but thanks to a just and merciful God our hopes are brighter than at any time since we have been struggling for Independence. May the God of Battles defend our cause, protect our Armys from danger & disease, and crown them with glory and success. Tate, Hal, Mrs. Galloway, Miss Watlington & Mrs. Samples all spent the day at Gen. Forrest's Hd. Qts. Bettie, Mamie & Rob, of course, along. Maj. Leverson came for us, I do like him so much, he is so kind and attentive. We had a delightful day. Gen. Forrest & Lady very kind. We saw all of our friends, too numerous to name. Maj. Leverson brought us home this eve. Tate went riding on horseback with Bro. Brodie, we heard Ford Rodgers was not expected to live, Hal knows nothing of it, I pray it may be untrue. God bless my dear Father and Brothers. We spend the day in Tupelo again tomorrow -
July, Tuesday 5, 1864
        Jake Anderson & Ebb Titus came by this morning - Col. Polk came out in Gen. Forrest's Ambulance for us to go in and spend the day with Maj. Leverson & Maj. Rambeaut. We had a delightful day, the Miss Skurlarks and Miss Bills, of Jackson, Tenn. were there, we played Cards, talked, and had a gay time. All of our friends nearly, we saw, ate dinner at three o'clock, and a more sumptuous fare I never saw grace a table. We all talked a while on the Porch after dinner, when our crowd came home to fix for a little dance, which we enjoyed very much, danced until two o'clock, and only got through with six setts . I played Euchre with Maj. Leverson, lost all except the last game, which I won him. We all like him very much. Gen. Forrest was opposed to the dance, so none of his crowd were there. Majs. Leverson and Rambeaut are splendid entertainers. I was shocked at the Miss Skurlarks deportments - Miss Clara Bills came home in the Ambulance with us. I never was so tired in my life, and the flees nearly divoured us. Mrs. Galloway would not go. My setts were danced as follows, 1st. Mr. Pugh, 2nd. Dr. Cowen, 3rd. Mr. Beaumont, 4 Maj. Rambeaut, 5th. Lt. Rodgers, 6th. Capt. Barber - the others, Maj. Leverson, Donelson, Rodgers, & Scruggs were not danced - too late.



July, Wednesday 6, 1864
        Oh! I never was as sleepy in my life as this morning. Hal and Miss Clara ready for breakfast, I was not - went in after the rest had finished and got a Cup of Coffee. We all seemed dull and lazy this morning. John came in the Ambulance for Bro. George and Miss Billie to go to Tupelo, Dr. Cowen, Lt. Dunn, & Bro. called. Maj. Crump & Lt. Rodgers came also, did
not stay long - Hal and I came upstairs as soon as we got dinner and went to sleep - just dresed in time - Eddie & Bruce came over. Decatur and Bruce went to Tupelo, Eddie went back to Camp at Verona. Lt. Rodgers came over after tea, they all have marching orders at 5 o'clock in the morning, do not know which way they are going, the Yankees are moveing out towards Ripley - God grant that our poor Soldiers may be spared, and crown the Southerners with glory and success. Save my poor Bro. oh! grant that he may nobly do his duty, but return safe. Bless my dear Father and his household. Hal is waiting for me to tell her fortune - everybody retired early tonight, disgusted with every enjoyment except the soft folds of the Arms of Morpheus. No late war news, Answer to flag of Truce from Memphis, Washburn still refuses to have any understanding with regard to the black flag -



July, Thursday 7, 1864
        All up this morning to breakfast - a very warm day. Capt. Ferd Rodgers came this morning, we were delighted to see him, he is looking better than I ever saw him, although he is just recovering from a terible sickness. Maj. Rambeaut & Maj. Leverson also Bruce came out this morning to see us. Capt. Rodgers went into Tupelo with them. Tate cut out Maj. Leverson's shirts, so Hal and I missed our nap this eve and sewed on them. Tate is makeing Capt. Rodgers. Maj. Crump came over this morning, Robert went to Tupelo with him, they came back this evening. I received a letter from home and one from Helen, all well. Capt. Mason and Mr. Beaumont came out this eve. Tate and Mr. B. went riding on horseback, they staid until after Tea.
 Our news from the Enemy is rather exciting, they are advancing in force, and our Armies are not many miles apart, the command is expecting orders every hour. God grant they may check the wicked foe, and drive them from our soile . Answer to flag of truce, no black flag, but as near to Christian warfare as is possible. Oh! God have mercy on our Army - crown them Victorious.



July, Friday 8, 1864
        We all were at our work early this morning, and would have finished the shirts but had orders to move, Mr. Pugh came for us with two Ambulances and a baggage Wagon. We packed and were off in ten minutes time. Arrived in Tupelo at 1 o'clock, went to Gen. Forrest's Hd. Qts. every thing was in bustle, and hopeful in the comeing campaign. Met with Gen. Lee, who had just arrived on the cars, I am perfectly delighted with him, if I had a heart to lose, I think it would be in danger. God bless both of them, spare time to our Country, and crown them with Victory, in the battle which awaits them. We ate supper with Maj. Rambeaut, it was delightful. We spent a very pleasant evening. Maj. Leverson, Maj. Rambeaut, Mason, Beaumont and many other friends are as kind to us as Bros. We came up to Col. McCarty's, put the children to bed, our friends spent the evening. Maj. Crump and Eddie came to see us, we bid them all good bye, and will not see them again until after the battle. God grant they may all be spared. The Yanks are at Ripley, moveing down in force. We have no idea where the battle will be fought -


July, Saturday 9, 1864
        Not much sleep did any of our room have last night - I did not close my eyes, the rest for only a few moments, between the flees and the bed bugs I spent a miserable night. Hal and I dressed long before day. Maj. Rambeaut, Capt. Mason & John came for us to go over for breakfast - we had a delightful Cup of Coffee, enjoyed our friends for a little while, then hurried on to the train. Met Mrs. Forrest, the Gen. and her two companions Miss Montgomery & Miss Grant. We did not get off for some time, Gen. Forrest had a fight with the Conductor before he would get off. Our trip was tedious, disagreeable and warm, the Children suffered with heat very much. Arrived in Columbus at 4 o'clock, stoped at City Hotel. Hal and I have a very pleasant room. Therese Blennerhassett came over and spent the evening with me. I was delighted to see her, oh! how many bright and happy recollections her presence recalls, yet alas, my poor weary heart, how sadly has life changed. Lt. Anderson came to see me this evening, brot the sad news of Lt. Lightner's death, also of Lee Elliotts being wounded, he is a Missourian.



July, Sunday 10, 1864
        A long, long weary day this has been for our little party. I went over to see Therese directly after breakfast and staid until dinner time. We had a long talk, she is a sweet girl, and I believe a good friend of mine. I did not get to bid either Bro. Geo. or Bruce Good bye - Bro. G. left for the front to join Forrest, and Bruce has recovered from his wounds and gone to report to Johnston in Ga. Dispatches say the Yankees are in force in Pontotoc on yesterday, our boys will have some terible fighting.
God grant they may be victorious, oh! heaven hear our prayers, spare our friends and Bros, and shield our Gens. from danger, drive our wicked, heartless enemies back to their own hearth stones, smile upon, and prosper and bless once more our Sunny land. We had a hard rain this eve, Tate went to Church. Therese came over - our land lord is a very pleasant gentleman, Mamie is sick, he came up and sit with us awhile. Hal & I sleep in Tate's room.



July, Monday 11, 1864
        Tate, Hal and myself went over to see Therese and her Sister after breakfast, did not stay very long - just fixing for a nice, cool time when Miss Tabb, Miss Cannon and Sister, and Mr. Pugh called to see me. I was delighted with them, Miss Tabb in particular, they did not stay very long. We had some Candy made, Bettie went up to the Saloon and bought a large bowl of Ice cream which we enjoyed very much - had just fixed and begun my sewing when Mr. Sam Tate called, we all had to see him. After he left did not have time to fix again before dinner. Our land lord sent us up a nice julep before dinner. Therese came over and spent the evening with us, a very hard rain. Mr. Pugh called and brought me a beautiful Magnolia, with Miss Askew's compliments. Capt. Webb came for me to go to the Depot and assist in feeding the Soldiers of Neely Brigade, which are moveing from Ala. to Forrest's relief, only one Mobile Battery was there, which we fed, the rest will be here in the morning. A great many Ladies were ready, Therese & her Sister I went with -
July, Tuesday 12, 1864
        A cloudy, gloomy morning. Therese came over early after breakfast for us to go with her to the Depot, and assist in feeding the Soldiers, Hal and Tate would not go. I went, Mr. Pugh walked with me, I promised him if he would be a good boy, I would speak well of him, he is by far, one of the kindest young men I ever met. It repaid us for all of our labor and fatigue to see how the poor Soldiers enjoyed the food, they had nothing to eat since breakfast yesterday morning, their horses were broken down, they had to take the train here, did not get off until 4 o'clock this eve, will have to fight as Infantry. Our troops have fallen back to Okolona, the Yanks were in 15 miles if them today. Our troops are confident of success, God grant they may be Victorious. Hal & I spent the evening with Therese - the Dr. McKim came to see Mamie, she is quite sick.



July, Wednesday 13, 1864
        Mr. Pugh came round early this morning, we made arrangements to start for Nannie in the morning. Therese was to go with me. Capt. Tom Dashiell was to furnish the Ambulance - our trip had fully matured in preperations - but Tate gave up the idea, so our trip has fallen through. Capt. Dashiell came round after tea, will send his Ambulance early in the morning. Hal, Therese and I are going to spend the day with Bro. I wish we were all going out to stay, but little Mamie is too sick. No news from Forrest yet, we only know they are fighting. God grant they may be successful, and spare the lives of our dear Soldiers, protect my dear Bro. and friends from danger. Therese and Miss Wilkinson called this eve. Hal and I went to
the Saloon and had a nice treat of Ice Cream, Robert was with us. Dixie prices are very high, but this rather startled us, $26. Mr. Pugh attends the weding tonight, Miss Cozart of this place, to Mr. Philips of Nashville.



July, Thursday 14, 1864
        Hal, Therese and I got up very early and started for the Country, after running around, first on one road then another, we finally arrived at Waverly, just 7 miles above Columbus, although we had traveled ten or twelve miles. We crossed the Tombigbee, rode up to Mr. Young's, where he came out and insisted on our getting out, until he would send and try to find out where Bro. lived, failed however, but we spent the day. Fate, how strange, yet how delightful, they are a very wealthy family, a real Southern Mansion - his Daughters are very accomplished, and Miss Lou is a beautiful girl - such delightful Music, and an elegant dinner, our first peaches and milk. We went to the Pond late this evening, to try to learn to swim. Hal would not venture, Therese and I tried it. I did not have any confidence in myself, therefore did not make much improvement. Therese was more successful. We had a delightful drive home, found Mamie well, and good news from Forrest.



July, Friday 15, 1864
        Our dispatches from the front are very encouraging - Forrest is fighting the Enemy near Tupelo - nothing decisive, but we have repulsed them in every attempt to fight us. God grant our Army may be crowned with glory and success - protect my dear Bro. and friends from all danger. The news
from Virginia is glorious, God grant it may be true, our forces in three miles of Washington City, and shelling the City. Oh heaven, smile upon our poor, desolated South, brighten the hearthstones of our sad and lonely homes - drive our enemy back, take them in peace, we do not wish them any harm, but oh! grant our Sunny land Victory and peace, bless my dear old Father and spare him to us, for the days when our dear boys will once more bless our homes with their presence. After tea, all sitting in our Room, Mr. Crump sent Dis. "Yankees whipped & making for Ripley & Forest after them" - thank God for this. Letter from home, poor Nannie Fletcher dead -
        Therese and several ladies called.



July, Saturday 16, 1864
        Today Hal, Tate and myself set apart for returning our visits. Capt. Dashiell kindly sent his Rockaway. Therese and Miss Helen Goff came to see us, we started calling just at 11 o'clock - to see Mrs. Forrest first, she had just received a Dispatch from the Gen. he was slightly wounded in the foot. We have the advantage, the enemy in full retreat, but our victory not as yet decidedly great. We returned all calls. Bro. came and spent the evening with us - Nannie and Dashiell came down from Aberdeen. Dashiell's wound looks very badly and I fear if he is not very prudent, he will be very unfortunate yet. Mr. Pugh and I went out calling this eve, Dashiell, Tate, Nannie, Hal & I went over to see Therese and her Sister after Tea. Oh! such a terible warm night I never experienced. Nannie staid in the room with Tate. Hal & I tried our room for the first time, I am almost sufocated with the heat -


July, Sunday 17, 1864
        All ready for breakfast, one of the warmest mornings we have had. Therese came over after breakfast to see if some of us would not go to Artesia on the train, to assist in attending to the wounded Soldiers. I fixed up my baskett , went by for Therese & her Sister, we met the other Ladies at the Depot, arrived at Artesia, did not wait long for the train, first two were loaded with Soldiers going to Demopolis to relieve Talagega of the raid not threatening it. Next two trains were loaded with our wounded, and oh! my heart ached to see so much suffering, we soothed and gave them every thing they wanted, returned to Columbus on the eve train. Col. Crosslin of 7th. Ky was aboard, destined for Columbus, badly wounded. We had a very disagreeable, warm trip, but a consolation in knowing we had soothed our suffering Soldiers. Saw Capt. Mason at Artesia, was delighted of course, spent the evening, took tea with Mollie Tabb, met my old friend Mollie at Artesia, Therese, Mr. Berry & Lt. Watts called to see us. Bro. George came today - Dashiell improving -



July, Monday 18, 1864
        I was very unhappy about no conveyance to go out to Bro's, sitting in the Parlor after breakfast, when our new made friend Mrs. Reynolds came in for Hal, Therese and myself to go out and spend a few days with her - I accepted, Hal, after we came to our room, did not seem to like it, though I had no idea of anything of the kind when in Mrs. R. company. Tate and Nannie both seemed distressed at Hal's departure - censured me for accepting the invitation. I can have no happiness, it seems, without so much unhappiness.


  We arrived at Col. Young's about 11 o'c. Miss Lou, who is one of the sweetest ladies I ever met, Miss Paine and Col. Young greeted us cordially, and a happy day the rest was to me, Late in the evening we all went down to the Pond, went in bathing, and had a gay time, though some redicilous scenes among the beginers . Therese has more confidence than Hal or I, therefore gets along better. I must confess I am really a coward in Water -



July, Tuesday 19, 1864
        A bright and beautiful morning - my heart seems as light and happy as the sunshine is lovely. I am perfectly in love with this charming family. Mrs. Reynolds is so warm hearted and good, though our acquaintance has been so short, it seems we have always been friends, and Miss Lou, ah! how can I express the admiration I have for her, how beautiful, how lovely she is. I have never, since the days of my childhood, met with any Ladie I am so completely in love with - how my heart aches for a friend, just as Miss Lou is - if I only could gain her confidence. There is something about her that reminds me of my dear, dear Mother. We have spent a delightful day. Mrs. James Young called to see us, she sings exquisitely. Mrs. Judivron called also. We all went bathing again. Therese progresses rapidly, though Hal and I are still great cowards. Lou and I had a game of Chess after tea. I cannot but be unhappy about not being at Bro. I know I will be censured by all parties -



July, Wednesday 20, 1864
        Another happy and beautiful morning. Miss Lou gave me some Cotton
to knit Eddie a pr of socks. I began them, but did not get much done, most of the time playing Bagammon, Chess, or having some Music, learned Miss L. two pieces, "Brightest Eyes Quick Step," "Rosebud Waltz," she was very apt, but I fear her swimming scholar will ever be a drag to the art.
        Our days are as happy as can be, her Bro. Lt. Watt Young came today on short leave, he is rather shy of Ladies, therefore we have not seen much of him. All went to the Pond again, Hal was sick, and could not go in. I believe I am a greater coward every time I attempt it. Therese is still gaining confidence, and improving. Mrs. Tom Young and Mrs. King came round to see us after tea, we had a very happy evening. Hal and I did not agree very well - I bet I would finish my sock, she bet I would not, so she put the Gas out. I lit it again and finished my sock.



July Thursday 21, 1864
        Still my happiness continues, I do dearly love Miss Lou and Mrs. Reynolds both. Mrs. Hamilton, their Sister, invited us to Tea, we accepted, spent the day so happy - all retired after dinner for a rest, got up early, prepared for the pond. Mrs. Reynolds and Hal did not go in, it was so much like rain. Lou, Therese and I tried it. Therese got along charmingly - I, poor me, I am a greater fool than ever. A shower came up, so we had to hasten our pleasure - began preperations for our visit as soon as we reached the house. We all five went in the Cariage , I never have spent a more pleasant evening, the Supper was Magnificent - everything passed off so well. I have fallen in love with Mrs. Hamilton, she is almost as sweet as
Lou. There is something I cannot resist in watching dear Lou, she is more like my Mother each day that I am with her. We staid until 12 o'clock, a beautiful moonlight night. Lt. Watts rode home with us - Gen. Johnston has been superseded by Hood, the latter haveing orders to fight immediately.



July, Friday 22, 1864
        We all were ready for Columbus quite late, rather late in our breakfast after last night's dissipation. I was really sad at leaveing , so much happiness for my lonely life crowded into one short week. Met Col. Porter of Gen. Cheatam's Staff at breakfast. We did not tarry long after our meal was finished, had a very dusty, disagreeable, warm ride to Columbus, and my heart was indeed sad to part with dear "waverly" - Lou came in with us, oh! that dear, sweet girl, I do dearly love her. Therese alighted first - we then came to the Hotel. Lou came and sat with us a while, I gave her my Photograph Album. Telegrams - Hood has fought and whiped Sherman - Grant has at last been relieved of his command, by the interposition of our divine Father. Flags all at half mast over the eventful news. God in his Wisdom will do all well. Went walking this eve with Therese and Lucy Harris. Company after Tea, and sat up very late. I am so unhappy - and no one to confide, oh! God, have mercy -



July, Saturday 23, 1864
        I was never so sleepy as when awakened this morning, after breakfast got my sock and knot all morning. Maj. Rambeaut and Mr. Pugh came up in
Tate's room and sat. Cousin Frazor came for a while. The news this morning is glorious, Hood has attacked Sherman, and driven his force across the River, with heavy loss on Yankee side. Hardee is the rear, and will give them a warm reception. Did not get the evening Telegrams before leaving Columbus. Bro, Kate, and Nannie came in, I returned with Bro. I am perfectly unhappy at the way in which Hal has treated me. I have no plans, nor no idea when I will see one of them again. God be with me and guide me to do what is right. Therese & Capt. Triplett called this eve, Col. Laynard also, Decatur arrived. Nothing reliable as to Grant's death. Bro, Kate and I had a very pleasant ride out. Sister Amirilla and all the Children glad to see me, all sat up late. Mrs. Smith and I occupy the same room. I am so undecided and unhappy. May God give us Victory, spare so much bloodshed, and give us peace.



July, Sunday 24, 1864
        We all slept very late this morning, Bro. sent to Columbus for the news, boy did not get back until after dinner, then had no news. A note from Bro. Geo. saying he and his crowd would leave for Libby in the morning - nothing over the wires since we left yesterday evening. A note from Therese, she is anxious I should come in, & make another visit to Waverly. I am as unhappy as mortal can be at the manner in which Hal has treated me. I have no idea where or what will be my movements, I have no idea they will be to satisfy anyone else, but pray God may guide me right, and bless and brighten my sad path -
        Mrs. Smith, Sister Amirilla, Bro and myself with the Children have
spent the day quite pleasantly, sat up late after Tea. Mrs. Smith and I are still room mates - Sam is improveing very slowly, poor little fellow, he looks dreadfully -



July, Monday 25, 1864
        How very cold it was this morning, We must have had a great Victory in Ga. as this cool weather always indicates a great Southern Victory. No news over the wires again today, it seems strange, but God grant we may be victorious. Our Enemy have every advantage, yet in the God of battles we out our trust, and have faith that all will be well. Mrs. Smith returned to Aberdeen this morning. Sister Amirilla and I spent the day mostly alone, Bro. was off on the farm. I did not quite finish my Sock, had a good nap after dinner. Eddie arrived this evening from Gen. Chalmers Hd. Qts. - no news from Ga. or Va. yet. Eddie is right sick, has not been well since the fight. We all retired early. Katie is going to sleep with me, Rachel will make her pallet in here also. I am the greatest coward in the world. Still undecided in my movements, I reckon Hal & her crowd are happy tonight. May God soften my heart, I cannot but feel bitter, oh! guide and give me strength to bear my unhappy fate -



July, Tuesday 26, 1864
        Ah! sad and lonely days, are these now passing. Eddie went to Columbus this morning, returned this evening, brot news of 25th. from Ga. the Yanks were shelling Atlanta, nothing decisive as to the fate of either Army in that State - Hood gave them a bad thrashing, but from Telegrams since, I fear our Victories cannot be followed up. God grant we may be
blessed with glorious news from them in a day or two - nothing important from other points. Tate and her crowd did not leave Columbus until today. Robert was sick yesterday and they could not leave. I heard through Therese from them, they spent last eve at Mrs. Weaver's. I am so unhappy, I don't know what to do, whether to go on home, or not, - oh! my heavenly redeemer, guide me, teach my heart forbearance, and for pity lighten my trials.
        I finished one of Eddie's socks today, had a long nap this eve, consequently am not sleepy tonight, recieved letters from Capt. Barber and Shallie Kirk. We all sat up late - oh! heaven have mercy, I am so unhappy.



July, Wednesday 27, 1864
        We all got up very early this morning - Bro. Eddie had to go to Columbus, Eddie arrived in time for the train, and left for Okolona. Bro. came back quite late this evening, bro't no reliable news, from any point. Yanks still shelling Atlanta, the raide seems now to be pressing Jackson, Miss. instead of our front, those on the Charleston R. R. seem to be resting on their cares, wacthing , and guided by movements in Ga. God grant their plans may be frustrated, and our arms Victorious. Cousin Frazor arrived today and has been quite sick all evening. I am as unhappy as mortal can be. Bro. opposes my going for some time. I have my plans made, however, and have no idea of changeing them. I have had so much to try me, I have no patience to argue the question, and trust there will be no more unpleasantrys with regard to it. Oh! God give me strength, give me strength to bear up. -


July, Thursday 28, 1864
        Another long, long weary day. I have been knitting very hard, to try and keep down my miserable feelings. Rachel very kindly offered to clean my head nicely - I accepted, so tonight I have one consolation, a nice, clean head. Nothing important has passed today, neither have we heard one word of news. Oh! it would kill me to live in the Country - Bro. was very angry with me this evening because I would not consent to remain. I of course did not agree to any such arrangement. I am dependent on him however, for a conveyance to Columbus, and he cannot take me before Sunday. God grant me contentment until then. I am going in opposition to my realtive's advice. My life has not been one to make me bound by affection to obey. I cannot live thus - I am going, I know not when. Oh! God guide and protect me - I will do my duty to myself, though the world condemn me -



July, Friday 29, 1864
        I think without doubt, this is the warmest day I ever experienced, knit all day, finished Eddie's socks, and Amanda washed them out for me, just finished them in time, Eddie arrived from Columbus this eve, spent yesterday and part of today with Tate and the girls at Tibbee. They sent me no messages or regrets that I was not with them. I hope it will all be right - God be with and guide me. No late news from either Army, Va. or Ga. news of Kirby Smith's crossing the River from Trans Mississippi to this Department. God is with us, and the light of independence now glimmering in the distance will soon burst forth with a halo of unfading light and glory.


Sam was not so well, sent for Dr. Brice, he came, bro't his daughter, Kate Brice, who is my room mate for tonight. Eddie, Brother and all of us sat up quite late talking - my dear Brothers how dearly I love them. God grant we may all be spared to meet once more around the hearthstone of dear old Father - God bless and protect him -



July, Saturday 30, 1864
        Bro. and Eddie were undecided for some time this morning whether or not I should return to Columbus. Eddie at last consented to bring me in. We had a warm, disagreeable ride, found Therese at home and glad to see me. Eddie came round after dinner, and sat with Therese and I some time, poor Eddie, I was so grieved to bid him good-bye, hope to meet him before he leaves for Camp. Lou Young came round to see us, invited us home with her, which I of course did not refuse, Therese also - We had a nice ride out - Dr. Butts came with us - her Bro. Willie at home, we had a game of grab, did not last long. We then went down to the pond, and had a nice bath. I still have a great horror of the water.
        No late news from the Army today - none from my friends at Tibby - I am really sad at parting from my Brothers - oh! heaven guide me, and protect me from harm. Lou, Therese and I are room mates tonight -



July, Sunday 31, 1864
        This morning has been spent very quietly, Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, - Lou's sister, and her husband, - were here. Mrs. H. invited us when she left to visit her bath this evening, owing to our religious scruples not allowing us to go in the fish pond. The rain however interfered with our plans. In the afternoon, Lou, Miss Mary Lou and I occupying one bed in our
room while Mrs. Reynolds and Therese had the other. I was the only one who succeeded in "making the trip," we started on - the others finding it impossible, for which non compliance of orders on their part I fully made up until I was awakened by the thunder not only in the Heavens, but in the bed beside me. We were interrupted in the midst of a highly intellectual conversation by the arrival of Miss Harris, Mrs. Martin and Mrs. Johnston, we dressed, spent a quiet evening and retired.