March, Tuesday 1, 1864
        First day of Spring - Laura awakened me for my breakfast. I looked out of the window and to my surprise, one of the hardest Snow Storms I ever saw was prevailing - lasted until 11 o'clock, when the sun shone out brightly. A more magnificent scene I never witnessed, the forests glistened like thousands of diamonds, sun set was glorious. It moderated a great deal, until night when the freeze came again. Laura and I spent the evening alone, except Beulah and Tippie Dora - buisy sewing. Laura just finished her ruffled apron - I am really proud of her, she sews so nicely. I spent the day in Tate's room, braided one width on my white swiss - if my chest was only stronger, I would enjoy sewing, but oh! I am so weary -
both in body and spirit. My angel Mother, you would not have thought your two youngest born could grow so indiferent . I pine for a companion, tis not my fault, she loves me not. My poor old Father, you are all that binds me here. Helen is to be married, they are all buisy , but do not wish me to share it - have seen no one, or heard nothing more from Dixie -



March, Wednesday 2, 1864
        Bright and beautiful - Ice glittering magnificently - moderating a great deal, by 12 o'clock all snow gone, real pleasant tonight. Father went to Mr. Holmes', our victory confirmed by news from below. Mr. Wilson dined with us, gave the same news Father heard at Mr. H's. Nonconnah out of it's banks, still raining. Tate and Cousin S. very much dissipointed , as they seem in great haste to go to the City. I sat in Parlor after Mr. Wilson came, braided another width on my swiss, tis real fascinating work, but oh! my chest aches so badly, no one but my sainted Mother ever knew or sympathized with me in this affliction. Laura washed today, although my only companion she has fallen into the arms of Morpheus, and left me real lonely, she and Bettie are improving very much in their lessons. Poor Father, he too is alone. I have forgiven the past, heavenly Father, give me strength to forget it. Nothing late from Jimmie or Eddie - Lord be with them in all hours of danger, and bring them safe to us.



March, Thursday 3, 1864
        The monotony of our life was somewhat changed today, by a visit from Lt. Bayard of the 4th U. S. R. to Nannie, he is her cousin, and came this
distance with only six scouts to make a call, they behaved themselves very well, ate dinner with us - and they all admit our dear Rebel Gen. Forrest defeated them badly in their raid to Okolona. Decatur Doyle came this evening from Dixie - Jimmie sailed for Europe the 6th. of Feb. Eddie and all the boys safe through the fight. Pontotoc suffered very much - Sister Mary with the two youngest children will start home some time next month. Col. Jeff Forrest is really killed - Sherman has returned to Vicksburgh. Our Army of Johnston advancing - Grant reported falling back.
        I have been buisy braiding all day, one more width finished - Laura has provoked me and I feel real cross - she or I one should certainly have less temper at times. All of them received letters tonight except me, tis now 10 o'c, and I think I will try and get to sleep early tonight. I suppose they are all happy in the house, O can never content myself with the lonely life I lead.



March, Friday 4, 1864
        I do wish Nonconnah would fall, and let a visitor from Memphis return home, for I am always in an ill humor when she is about. Tate and Helen went over to see Missie Morgan this evening. I have been in Tate's room all day buisy sewing - almost finished my dress -
        Mr. Hildebrand was here today, bro't noting later from Dixie - nor have we heard anything today. I wish one of the scouts would come, and bring us some news. It has been very cloudy and disagreeable all day, this evening we had quite a storm. I received today another batch of letters
from Dixie, to be mailed in Memphis for Yankee land. Decatur told us Gen. Armstrong had been ordered to Miss. he has taken Mariah to Mobile to be confined, poor girl I pity her, no Mother or relation to be with her. Laura as usual nodding, and I feel all alone. Beulah and Tippie Dora also enjoying their nap. I feel real sick tonight - oh! I am so lonely - what is to be my fate - oh! God shield me, have I not suffered enough - make my future bright.



March, Saturday 5, 1864
        Nonconnah has fallen at last, and crowds of waggons are passing, loaded with provisions, in exchange for their cotton. Joanna and Cousin S. went to town this morning. Mr. Wilson came early and staid until after dinner with us. Tate, Helen, Nannie & Decatur all spent the day sewing in my room, Decatur excepted of course from the sewing - we had a pleasant time. Only this morning I did wish I was a man. I never read a more insulting note in my life than Father received from Dr. Malone. I will not stain the page of my book writing of such a dog, and hope God will give me strength to forgive it -
        Cold Water and all streams below so high that we have no communication with Dixie - therefore have heard no news today. I would give anything if I could send the things I have for the poor soldiers - poor fellows, I know they need them - would to heaven I had money to get all I could bring through the lines. I finished my dress today, and made Laura a beautiful apron. 12 o'c, no Beulah yet. Laura, Tippie Dora & I alone, they asleep.


March, Sunday 6, 1864
        A bright and beautiful day. Tate and Nannie went to Church. Col. Perkins came home with them to take Nannie home with him. Prior leaves for the Army in the morning, was anxious to see Nannie before he left. Tate saw Cousin Cambell, just arrived from Dixie, no news - waters up - Telegraph all destroyed - floating rumors that Sherman had arrived safely in Vicksburgh, Forrest moving this way - that is glorious news for us. Cousin Mat, Frazor and Joanna came from Memphis about 10 o'c. Mary was delighted with the arrival of Frazor. Joanna went to the Provost Marshall yesterday to get her a pass, and he started to arrest her, thought it was me. I heard some good news, she heard one of the 4th. U. S. R. swear he would shoot old Gibbert, the dutch detective.
        I have not received a letter for over two weeks, and expect old Williams has intercepted them in the Post Office - oh! God, how long, how long must we suffer -
        Beulah has run off again tonight. Laura, Tip and I alone. Laura and Bettie said a good lesson - we all sat in the Parlour after Tea. One month today since Jimmie left for Europe.



March, Monday 7, 1864
        The quiet of our life was disturbed today by the arrival of 150 Yankees - only two came to the house. We gave them their dinner. Mr. Wilson and Decatur were down in the Orchard. Helen sent for them to come and capture the Yanks, we saw the rest coming, & Tate and I ran to tell them it was too great a risk. Mr. W. and D. were nearly to the gate, I was
never so excited - we turned them in time, the two Yanks passed while we were standing there. Mr. W. and D. came to the house and spent some time with us, when Mr. W. followed the Yankees. They returned about 9 o'c on their way to Memphis. D. and Cousin F. had a run again, with the horses, but fortunately none of them came in.
        I have not done any work today, have suffered death with my spine. Tate and Helen at work in my room all day - I sat in Tate's room until bed time. Beulah, Laura, and Tip all in time - I amused myself reading Artemus Wards book.
        We did not hear what the Yanks went for, we heard from Eddie and the boys, all safe. One of Henderson's scouts arrived.



March, Tuesday 8, 1864
        Cousin Mat, Frazor and Joanna went in town this morning. Joanna was to have returned this evening, did not come. We heard what the Yanks were after - old Frank the detective carried them to Felix Davis's and took him and his wife both to Memphis, they are now in the Irving Block, we did not hear the offence, only 'twas some old grudge he had against Mr. Davis. They stole a good deal from Widow Hildebrand's but she has taken the oath, and I don't care much. I pity poor Mr. & Mrs. Davis, they have been so kind to our Soldiers.
        Nannie Perkins came home this morning. Joe Clayton - Memphis Light Dragoons - came on short furlough. Tate & I are going after Mrs. Clayton & Hal tomorrow. We all spent the evening in the Parlor, singing and playing. I am almost crazy with my spine, took a dose of Morphine, I am


in so much pain it does not affect me - All spent day in my room sewing - Laura and Beulah in, Tip not arrived. Oh! I am so lonely, and suffering so much.



March, Wednesday 9, 1864
        Tate and I went over to Mrs. Clayton early this morning - had to pass through the Yankee Camp, no trouble, spent the day and came back this evening. Hal and Dink came with us - Tate's horse threw her, not hurt, I was never so full of laugh - reached home about dark. After Tea we were all sitting in the Parlor when in walked Joe Clayton and Mr. McCorkle, our little St. Louis friend, he has a furlough, and is going to St. Louis and New York to see his Father and Sister - we were all delighted to see him. All sat in the Parlor until 11 o'clock, singing, playing and had a real nice time. Laura and I were not so lonely. Hal shared my little room - I heard of my letters in town, but could not get any one to bring them to me. Mr. Wilson took one of those Yankees prisoner the other evening, and got him a fine Saddle and Bridle, so he has made up for his loss at the Party. Oh! I am suffering so much with my spine, what is to become of me -
        Mrs. Dupre arrived from Dixie, sent Helen two letters by me. I was so much disappointed that I did not get one. I expect my friends will all forget me now that I cannot run to Memphis and bring what they want.



March, Thursday 10, 1864
        Mr. McCorkle and Tate went to Memphis this morning. I hope he may have a safe and pleasant trip. Cousin Frazor left for Dixie this morning.


  We were delighted to see Mr. Wilson and Harbert this evening, they staid with us until after Tea, bro't a letter from Eddie and Bro. George. Tate was kind enough ti bring my letters from Memphis, one from Miss Em, two were for Surg Lenord from Mo to my care. Our house is crowded tonight. Mrs. Clayton and Hal share my room. I sat up very late, wrote to Maj. Price & Dr. Moses. No Yanks near today. I have suffered, no one can tell how much, with my spine. Mr. Bob Wallace and friend came to spend the night with us. I am so lonely and my spine hurts me so much I can't sew, and it is impossible to fix my mind on any reading for ten minutes, in the excitement we live in. I am unhappy and I tremble for fear there is something more fatal to befall me, as the Spine so much influences the brain.
        Beulah and Tip and Laura all here, sat up until 12 o'clock.



March, Friday 11, 1864
        Mrs. Clayton, Hal and Dink all went home this morning - Mr. Wallace & friend left. Decatur Doyle and Joe Clayton both left for Dixie - they both got all they came for. It has seemed quite lonely all day. I have been compelled to lie down most of the day with my spine, it is getting worse all the time. Tate & Helen sat in my room all day sewing. I am happy that poor Father can have some quiet now. I sat in the Parlor a little while after Tea - have spent the evening in my own lonely little room. Laura and Bettie said a good lesson - I tried to keep Laura awake, but she noded so, it worried me, and I sent her to bed. Tip is also asleep, and Beulah has not yet made her appearance. I wrote to Miss Em tonight, tis half past twelve - and I feel afraid. Joanna would not let me have the
key to lock my door, two robbers were killed near here yesterday, the Country is full of them - oh! God protect me. One year ago Mrs. Bredell & I arrived in Granada - Wednesday.



March, Saturday 12, 1864
        Tate and Bettie went to Memphis this morning, did not succeed in getting anything through the lines, the Picket was very insulting to her. She brought me a letter, but not for myself, only my care, to Mr. Lawson in Henderson's scouts. I forwarded it to Capt. H. also a package of late papers, by Mr. Harbut, who spent the evening with us. We all sat in the Parlor, and have had a pleasant evening. Mr. Harbut vacxinated Father, Helen, Nannie and I , also Jane and Laura. I have made the skirt to my swiss Mull, and fixed me a beautiful braid pattern, and drew on the skirt ready for my work on Monday morning. I have not suffered much with my spine today, though only on account of taking Morphine last night, which has made me insensible to the pain. 11 o'clock, so I will to bed - no Beulah. Father gave me a key today. Tippie Dora & Laura both here.



March, Sunday 13, 1864
                        Hopes, what are they? Beads of morning
                       Strung on Slender blades of Grass,
                       Sweet is hope's wild warbled air
                       But oh! - it's echo is despair!
        Today is the first anniversary of the happiest day in my life - just one short year ago, twas then on Friday morning, he came for me to walk on
the hill to listen to the echoes of our triumph at Fort Pemberton (Greenwood) - I rushed on to meet my fate, oh! God that it had never overtaken me - yet tis the brightest spot in my sad life - his love - in reviewing my diary for '63 I find in this day a quotation from Raphael which has indeed found its moral. Oh! who in the course of his life has not felt some joy without a security, and without the certainty of a morrow. Time hath power over hours, none over the soul. Time had power over his heart, yet none over my true and holy love. Today he wooes the daughter of a more sunny clime - Miss Sallie Anderson of Mobile, may she never know the pangs of a deceived heart - I have spent the day alone in my little room, finished the book of John - bright and beautiful, though rather cool. Laura and Bettie went to Mrs. Wilson's, all the whole family walking and enjoying themselves - tis just four o'clock - I will wait until after Tea to finish. I sat in the Parlor with the Father after Tea. Laura and Bettie speeled at Baker tonight - No Beulah or Tip - Laura & I alone. Oh! my heavenly Father humble my heart, and give me Christian patience.



March, Monday 14, 1864
        I have had a miserable cold, and not fit for society - yet we have been delighted by the visit of a Rebel Major, Maj. Allen, who spent the day with us. I tried to braid on my dress, only a little while, my spine pained me teribly . Maj. A. went down to Col. Perkins to stay until Thursday, when I will have returned from Memphis - having attended to his wants. Mr. Wilson and Harbut came this evening. Mr. Harbut has brought him a new horse
very pretty one. Poor Anna, I think Mr. Wilson ought to give her rest - they staid right late, we had a pleasant evening - music, conversation, &c. Anna Nelson and I have made our arrangements to go into Memphis tomorrow and not return till next day. Oh! Lord, deliver me from getting in any trouble with the Yanks, this will be a hard trip, I have a great risk to run. No Beulah tonight, I think she has forsaken her post. Laura and Tip both here nodding. I feel like I had been stewed - oh! God, protect, guide and make me a good girl.



March, Tuesday 15, 1864
        Anna Nelson and I started to Memphis about 9 o'clock, suffered very much with the cold, stoped at Mr. Roberts to warm - from there we passed through the Pickets to the Pigeon Rooste Road - found Mr. Harbut's after much searching - did not reach Memphis until 10 o'clock, left out horse & buggy at Mr. Barbier's, went up town - and not one thing would the Merchants sell us. because we did not live in their lines. I consoled myself with a wheel that could not turn - could not spin - went to see my friend Mrs. Facklen, she went up town and bought the things for me - poor deluded fools, I would like to see them thwart a Southerner in such an undertaking as I had. Spent a very pleasant evening with Mrs. Facklen's family - all rebels, and we talked just as we please! -
        Mrs. F. and I did not go to sleep until 2 o'c, this being the first time I had seen her since she returned from Dixie. I have finished all my provisions, and will have nothing to do tomorrow except fixing my things for smuggling.
March, Wednesday 16, 1864
        Went up Street directly after Breakfast to finish a little job I forgot on yesterday. At one o'clock Mrs. Facklen, Mrs. Kirk and I began to fix my articles for smugling , we made a balmoral of the Grey cloth for uniform, pin'd the Hats to the inside of my hoops - tied the boots with a strong list, letting them fall directly in front, the cloth having monopolized the back & the Hats the side - All my letters, brass buttons, money, &c in my bosom - left at 2 o'clock to meet Anna at Mr. Barbie's - started to walk, impossible that - hailed a hack - rather suspicious of it, afraid of small-pox, weight of contrabands ruled - jumped in, with orders for a hurried drive to Cor Main & Vance - arrived, found Anna not ready, had to wait for her until 5 o'clock, very impatient - started at last - arrived at Pickets, no trouble at all, although I suffered horribly in anticipation of trouble. Arrived at home at dusk, found Mr. Wilson & Harbut, gave them late papers and all news. Mrs. Harbut here to meet her Bro. bro't Mr. Wilson a letter from Home in Ky. Worn out. 8 yds. Long cloth, 2 Hats, 1 pr Boots, 1 doz. Buttons, letters, &c. 2 Cords, 8 tassels.
        Laura, Beulah & Tippie Dora, all in.



March, Thursday 17, 1864
        My cold is no better - miserably hoarse, got up rather late. Laura brought my breakfast to my room, fixed my work to go in the Parlor - found Mr. Wilson & Mr. Harbut arrived - All buisy sewing, laughing & talking, -
when the Yankees were reported coming, Mr. W. & H in the greatest haste retreated through the Garden, left their horses - the report was a mistake, it being Maj. Phil Allin - All quiet again, enjoying ourselves very much. Maj. Allin liked his Hats very much. Mr. Harbut, Sr. & Mr. Redford came - after a little Mr. Falls and Miss McKinney, they brought the rest of Maj. Allin's clothes. Mr. Wilson left early to start a currier below - the rest remained until after dinner then returned to Memphis. Mr. Harbut & Maj. Allin staid late, left together, oh! how I hate to see the last Grey Coat disappear. Father and I sat alone in the Parlor after Tea.
        Laura, Beulah & Tip all in tonight, all asleep except I. I shall read myself into the arms of Morpheus - When, oh! when will it be bright, my Savior I trust in thee, hope & faith oh! God give me strength -



March, Friday 18, 1864
        One of the loveliest days I ever spent, bright and beautiful. I have been very buisy braiding my dress. finished 1 1/2 yd. it is very fascinating work, and with my natural abhorance of sewing I think this particular kind would give me much pleasure, if it were not for my miserable old spine. I am suffering intensely tonight from my hard days work. I fixed Mr. Noe's grave this evening, it is a lovely spot but oh! so sad, my heart aches when I think of his long suffering, and so young, taken from his poor widowed Mother. Oh! God drive those miserable wretches from our Sunny land, and give us freedom and peace. I have been alone today except Laura sewing. Tate came twice to sew on the machine - Joanna & Anna Wilson went to town this morning, got back safe, no late news. Mr. Wallace, Henry Wilson & friend were here to Tea. I came to my room very early - heard Bettie's & Laura's lessons. Beulah and Tippie Dora both here - read myself to sleep -


March, Saturday 19, 1864
        Today has been just as gloomy as yesterday was bright - cold, windy & cloudy. Helen & Nannie had a general cleaning up in the house. Laura was unusually particular about my room, kept me waiting until dinner time to get to my sewing. I made up for lost time, finished one width of braiding, and drew the rest of the pattern off. I don't know what I shall do, if I am to spend so much of my time alone - no companion except my sewing, which is almost too much food for a mind in the present state of my own - however, tis all for the best, God's will, not mine be done.
        Tate & Anna Nelson went to town this morning, got back safe. Mr. Eyrich sent me a nice lot of papers, Tate brought me a letter, as usual not my own, from Capt. Hoenstein to his wife in Mobile. No late news.
        Laura & Bettie recited a very good lesson tonight - everything in my room statu quo. Anna Wilson did not come, went with Helen & Nannie upstairs.



March, Sunday 20, 1864
        Another Sabath passed, and I read only eight Chapters in my Bible - first of the Acts - I did not get up until rather late. Laura brought me a nice, warm breakfast to my room. I don't know what I should do if it were not for her. A disagreeable day, cloudy, gloomy and real cold. I spent the morning alone in the Parlor reading. Mr. Wilson & Mr. Harbut arrived about 12 o'clock. No news, except that which we regreted very much. Gen. Chalmers relieved of his command, ordered to report to Gen. Polk, Misouri . McCulock takes his place - Forrest is on the wing again, no one knows where to - God bless Eddie and keep him safe, wherever they may go.


   Tate, Nannie, Helen & Mollie Strange all went to Church - got back late of course, were delighted to see our Scouts. Mr. Wilson is going to Camp tomorrow, I am so sorry. I had a nice bundle of papers to send Capt. Henderson, one also to Dr. Moses. Oh! if I was only sleepy, and nothing to read - what shall I do - Laura, Beulah & Tip all asleep.



March, Monday 21, 1864
        Wake'd up almost sufocating with the Smoke - wind from the East. Laura had to throw all the fire out of the stove. Began my work early, nothing to disturb me all day - finished two widths on my dress in braiding. Sat in the Parlor, no companion. Father came in once or twice, sat in his easy chair and read. Laura & I sat an old Goose this evening, and I think she acted her name to perfection about the nest we fixed for her - how cold today, it is real winterish. I am afraid we will not have much fruit this year. I sat in the Parlor a little while after Tea - Father was reading, so I thought my own little room much more agreeable, as the rest all went in Tate's room.
        Beulah has run off again tonight, and I expect will certainly get herself in trouble. Bettie and Laura in the same old style with their spelling lesson - all over, and here I sit alone, rocking, rocking, rocking - with the few embers in the grate my only reflection to the thousand thoughts which crowd my poor, clouded mind - oh! for sleep, deep sleep to relieve me.



March, Tuesday 22, 1864
        Sunshine has greeted us once more - it has been a lovely day. Nannie
& Annie Nelson went to town this morning, got back safe. No news - Mr. Eyrich sent me the late papers - I sent them on to Capt. Henderson by Mr. Harbut, he spent the day with us - his Bro & Mr. Redford came down to meet him, brought him a fine horse. We all spent the day in the Parlor. I finished braiding my dress - just as we had finished Tea, and were quietly chatting in the Parlor, - Peter ran hurriedly in and announced Jim Titus and Mr. Jack Doyle - of course we were all astonished, imagined Forrest near, and many other such ideas, ran out to meet them, instead of Mr. Doyle met old Boss Pugh, we were delighted to see them, but sorry to hear Forrest had passed us and gone to Jackson, Tenn. Jim & Mr. Pugh have only a short leave to see us, and then return to Columbus, where part of the command are. Eddie went with Forrest, I expect we will hear glorious news from him in a few days - God grant successful may be his career. Sat up rather late - as usual, my little family all right.



March, Wednesday 23, 1864
        Tate & I went to Memphis this morning bright and early - stoped at Mrs. Apperson's first - from there to Cousin Frazor. Tate met me at Mrs. Worsham's room, we then went up street, walked until three o'clock, attended to all affaires entrusted to our care, ready to leave at half past three - all of the Yankee Cavalry moveing , destination not known - could hear no particulars, think they are going after Forrest, who we think is on his way to Kentucky. The Yankees are evidently on a great fright about something. God grant they may be defeated in all their undertakings. We came through
white Pickets - I think we will not try them again - the Negroes are ten times more lenient - We came by Wash Taylor's, got two hats for soldiers - came through Yankee Camp, if the Lord forgives me I will never do it again. Yankee Soldier drove our horse in Nonconnah for us - seemed to be a gentleman, for which we were very grateful - found Mr. Harbut awaiting our report. Mr. John & Henry Nelson & Mr. Harbut took Tea with us. Jim & Mr. Pugh completed the list for a nice Rebel meeting - brought a great deal through lines this eve - Yankee Pickets took our papers -



March, Thursday 24, 1864
        I slept very late this morning - had breakfast in my room - I would rather have slept than have the choicest dishes from old Schwab's. Ready at last, arrived in the Parlor, found Jim & Mr. Pugh with the girls having a nice time - spent the morning fixing my old Bombazine dress. Enjoyed my dinner finely, did not stay in the Parlor very long after dinner, came to my room and prepared for a nice evening siesta with London Papers for my companion - soon fell into the arms of Morpheus, slept soundly, but have had no spirit since awakening. Joanna got back from Memphis, bringing Mammy to see Prince. Anna Nelson will ride her Boo, a horse, through the lines tomorrow. Mr. Harbut came early this eve, I left them all in the Parlor - Father allows them to sit up late, as he is reading the papers - I got tired and came to my room, but found it very cheerless, no fire, smoking. Laura, Beulah & Tip all asleep - oh! I am so lonely - I feel a presentiment something good is going to turn up for the Confederacy - God bless my dear Bros, and bring them safe home again.


March, Friday 25, 1864
        As usual late, and breakfast in my room, found Nannie, Jim & Mr. Pugh having a nice time in the Parlor - have not done any work scarcely, only hem'd Eddie two handkerchiefs - Mr. Pugh and I had a game of drafts - I beat him the best three in five. Helen & Joanna went over to Mr. Armstrong's, did not hear any late news, Mr. Harbut came this evening, he had no news, no curior up for several days - heard from Mr. McMahon, in 2d. Mo Cav, he is very sick, and can't tell when he will come for his cloth and boots. Mr. Matthews, a soldier from Jackson Cavalry is staying with us tonight, Mr. Harbut stayed too, and we have spent a very pleasant evening. Jim & Boss Pugh the life of the party. Father was very lenient with us tonight, let us sit up until 11 o'clock - we Rebels are having a gay time, although the Yankee Camp is only three miles off. God bless our servants, for they are certainly very faithful. Laura is sitting in a chair now, fast asleep - Bettie did not wait to say her lesson. Beulah and Tippie Dora both sleep - here I sit, solitary and alone - my mind giving birth to a thousand thoughts yet none mature. God bless my Brothers, and oh! make me a better and more useful woman -



March, Saturday 26, 1864
        Today everything in commotion, as it is a general cleaning up day. Laura did not give me possession of my room until 12 o'clock - have not set a stitch in sewing today. Mr. Pugh and I spent the morning playing Drafts - I beat him badly. After dinner he very kindly offered to fix my lock, so he & I with Gimlet and other instruments proceed to my little
domicile to accomplish the task. I think I shall recommend him as a No 1 Carpenter - although he filled my eyes with sawdust - he fixed it very securely and nice - and I shall always think of and bless him, at the still hour of night, when thoughts and fears of a raide from the Yankees or Robbers are soothed only with it's security, as my faithful slave Laura, my dog Beulah, & kitty Tippie Dora, are always securely in the arms of Morpheus. I feel so much better about our affairs, I think the bright day is fast approaching. Tate & Anna Nelson got safe from Memphis - Anna got her Bro's horse through the lines - We have glorious news from Forrest, tomorrow I will give full particulars. God bless my Bro who is with him.



March, Sunday 27, 1864
        Rather lazy, as it was Sunday - Laura fixed me a very nice breakfast which I enjoyed in my room. Helen & Nannie went home with Anna Nelson, all rode horseback, the girls did not stay very long. I spent the morning reading my Bible, finished the Acts today - took a long walk after dinner, with Beulah as a companion - she enjoyed it very much, especially the creek. Tate & Helen went to ride over on the Plank Road this evening, they did not hear any news - Mr. Harbut came this evening, brought me a package of letters from Capt. Henderson, to be mailed in Memphis, also a note for myself from the Capt, with it a Dixie newspaper, which I shall carry to Mr. Eyrich. I sent Capt. H. a package of Yankee papers in return. Forrest captured Union City Thursday, taking 800 prisoners. God grant he may be successful in all his attempts to gain our lost teritory . The Yanks as yet
have not started after him, oh! heaven keep my Bro safe - All my little household asleep, and I am lonely, oh! so lonely. Staid in Parlor until 10 o'c, Father made us all retire - Mr. Harbut, Mr. Pugh & Jim he took with him -



March, Monday 28, 1864
        Tate and Anna Nelson went to Memphis this morning - got back safe Mr. Tommerry gave Tate up all of her things the U. S. G. confiscated, she brought them all safe through the lines, they belong to Mr. Wallace, who will be delighted to hear they are recovered. Mr. Harbut & Jim went off scouting, did not return until late this evening. We have had glorious news today - Mo. McCulloch captured Germantown, & still moving forward. Forrest is having glorious victory in Kentucky - Hickman & Paducah, both held by our forces - the Yanks are shelling Paducah. We are not afraid of Gun Boats - Father of justice and mercy, crown our armies with victory, drive the wicked tyrants from our Sunny land - we humbly crave thy pardon & blessing - oh! give us peace - guide my Bros, protect them from harm.
        I made my white swiss skirt, played drafts with Mr. Pugh, he beat me badly - trimed the Rose trees - have spent a very pleasant day - and am so happy tonight after the good news - God bless our dear Soldiers and Officers.
        I worship Jeff Davis and every Rebel in Dixie -



March, Tuesday 29. 1864
        A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance; but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken - Proverbs -
        I am sitting in my little room alone, with the exception of my little family, who are more inclined to the silent embrace of Morpheus than any
pleasures the quiet of my own society could give. Father was tired, went to his room early, gave us permission to sit up until 11 o'clock. I availed myself of it for a short time - finally withdrew to a more quiet scene, leaving Mr. Harbut, Mr. Pugh and Jim together with the girls, haveing a gay time. I have spent the day, how? I think it is how, Mr. Pugh & I played drafts most of the time, he beat me badly. I wonder in after years if I can recall this day, and imagine the same feeling of je ne sais quoi which I have experienced, there is a bright day fast approaching, I can't say why, but I feel it - oh! my beautiful savior, only teach my heart to be pure and good, let no unholy thought or action lead me astray oh! keep me near thee, let thy influence and protection guide me from wickedness, in the paths of righteousness - hasten the day I am to be free from this melancholy - then I will prove my punishment has been great enough, and through my afflictions I am a child of God - oh! give me thy love, make me a christian. God bless my Brothers, and my dear old Father -



March, Wednesday 30, 1864
        It seems I can never go to Memphis without some disagreeable arrangements and sayings. I was greatly disappointed in my trip. Tate and I went together. I stoped at Mrs. Facklen's on Union St. - she went on up to Cousin Frazor's in the buggy - Mrs. Facklen and Mrs. Kirk in great distress, old Hurbbut gave her ten days to abandon her house, she took and old Yankee Officer, his Wife & two children to board with her, hoping he would recall the heartless order to make her and her little children homeless. I did
not smuggle a thing through the lines, except some letters. Mr. Tommery gave me a permit to bring 2 Gals Whiskey and 5 bbs Tobacco - which I got home safely. Frazor came out in the buggy with me, Cousin Mat and Tate came together, we did not have any trouble at all - they all sat up very late in the Parlor, I came to my room early. Jim and Mr. Pugh came with me to try my whiskey - which they pronounced very good.
        I received a letter from Mrs. Moses today - and am really distressed she did not receive the last I forwarded to her. Forrest is having his own way in Kentucky - God grant Eddie may be safe.



March, Thursday 31, 1864
        Laura awakened me standing by the bed with my breakfast. I was too sleepy to eat, and only drank my Coffee. I have felt very badly all day, did not do any sewing, lying down most of the day. Mr. Pugh, Jim and Mr. Harbut with Jim's body guard the Prince of darkness, left for Dixie. Mr. Harbut is to meet the other Scouts a few miles below here, where they will all cross the R. R. together, joining Capt. Henderson somewhere in Tenn - all of troops have crossed Charlston R. R. and I expect we will hear glorious news in the nest few days. Jim & Mr. Pugh are trying to find a way to join Forrest, they had not been gone more than five minutes when four Yankees, belonging to 6th, Ill. Cav. came riding in, asked if we had seen any Confederate Soldiers, of course we said no. I think they came to steal, but we were polite to them, and they left - only wanted some milk, which they got. Tate & Nannie went to town today, Mr. Perryman got them a pass - they got home safe, but saw Anna Nelson and Sallie Hildebrand arrested and carried
back with a Negro guard, for smugling a pr of boots -
        Forrest is still moveing onward through Ky, having everything his own way. I came to my room early. A terible rainstorm raging - my pets all in. May my heart still be humble, and trust that God will, in his own time, brighten my life and happines -