August, Monday 1, 1864


My Dear Belle         It has been such an "egrejus " long time since I saw you last, that I'm quite at a loss how to commence the many long yarns I have in store for you, but as it's utterly impossible for me to communicate with you in any other manner than this, I must e'en put up with it - and narrate them as "gay and festive" as possible - but as I have been so very slow in writing this far, and it "waxes late" I will be compeled to leave for my next what I have so auspiciously begun in this - And although it is of the greatest importance that you hear what I have to say now, I will pleasantly forbear and bid you my "gentle and puserlanermus cuss" a fond adeu -

Miss Belle Edmondson - a kiss
August, Wednesday 3, 1864
        Third anniversary of my beloved Mother's death - There are few more sorrowful times, in the experience of poor Children of earth - than round
the deathbed of a loved and revered Mother - one who has been indeed a true faithful Mother, whose life to us has consecrated the name - and left it on our hearts as a holy word -



August, Friday 5, 1864
        Our gay little crowd was broken up this morning - Therese, Mrs. Martin both returned to Columbus, Mrs. Johnston went in with them to bring Mrs. Forrest out to spend a few days - they have not returned, but from a heavy cloud which passed over this eve, and from all appearances was inclined to moisten mother earth about that point, we all would feel uneasy, that is our only consolation. So we, a sleepy crowd, retire early, with the hopes of greeting them in the morning. Lou, Mary Poullaim, Mr. Will Young and I spent the evening together in the parlor, they knitting, he and I playing baggammon . All together we have had a delightful day. Lou and Mrs. Reynolds had company, Mary Lou and I had a nap - then a nice bath - not much swiming . Lou sat on the bank, much amused at our fear of a ducking - her country relations called and she could not venture in - I have decided to not leave until I hear from Tate.



August, Saturday 6, 1864
        We were all very uneasy all morning about Mrs. Johnson, the old driver arrived at 12 o'c with the news of trouble for them on yesterday evening. Mrs. Forrest's girl was very sick, she could not come. Mrs. Johnson started out rather late, the heavy storm which we thought would disturb the quiet of Columbus overtook her, three miles from Columbus, in
this deep trouble the Carriage broke down, so she had to return to the City, had a terible time. No limbs or loves lost however. Lou, Mrs. Reynolds, Mary Poullaim and I had a nice quiet day. Col. Young went to Columbus, left Mr. Will Y. to attend to the Mill, so we did not have much of his delightful company. Mrs. Johnson and Dr. Butts arrived with bad news from Mobile, the Yankee fleet passed Forts Morgan & Gaines with loss of only one boat, the Tecumseh. God grant the City may be saved.



August, Sunday 7, 1864
        A bright and beautiful day - no Church going from this establishment - we all spent the day at home, hoping and praying for the gloom which hovers over us to be dispelled, for the safety and success of our defences of Mobile, the defeat of the raids which are overrunning our poor desolated land. Give our Armies success, and oh, grant us peace. No later news from Mobile, or any other point. I received a letter from Hal, no news in it, am looking for her in a few days. Lou, and all of us slept all afternoon, I suffered very much with my ear all night, did not sleep much and fear I am a great deal of trouble to dear, sweet Lou -



August, Monday 8, 1864
        Day spent in kniting , Chas. D. C. - [illegible]
        I slept very little last night, and to my distress kept the other Ladies awake - poor Lou, the task fell to her to go down stairs for Laudanum, she is one of the sweetest girls I ever met, I love her with my heart's warmest affection.
        Mrs. Hamilton was down to Tea, we spent a pleasant evening. My deafness


is very disagreeable to myslef, and I suppose to every one else, having to enquire so often when addressed.
        The news from all points is not as encouraging as we hoped for - Mobile is teribly threatened. God grant our Armies may be successful in defence of the City -



August, Tuesday 9, 1864
        I heard this morning the sad news of poor Lt. W. Tabb's death, he was killed in Ga. in last Saturday's fight, in defence of Atlanta - how many desolated hearth stones, how long, oh! Lord, how long must we suffer.
        Nothing of importance haveing transpired today, I will not continue the light, only to record my weary heart aches.
        Miss Judiron & Dr. Judiron called this evening, I excused myself on account of deafness. Mrs. Young (Em) came, she came in the room where I was, and we had a nice little chat - enjoyed her delightful Singing after Tea. Mr. Jim Young gave us some of Artemis' best, of course much laughter and enjoyment by all -



August, Wednesday 10, 1864
        Still no decisive news from any point except the Surrender of Fort Gaines, this is a heavy blow, yet Morgan still stands to dispute their quiet entrance into the Bay. I am still as hopeful as can of Mobile, they are now 30 miles below in the Bay, with every obstruction to impede their reaching the City. May the God of battles defend us from any further invasion, by so wicked and sinful enemies as we have to contend with -


Mrs. Hamilton spent the day with us today, I could not have been much pleasure to her or anyone else, as 'tis no company for myself to suffer for so many nights with earaches, then left deff - I am afraid to go in the bath, as my country relations may be offended and depart. Lou & I against Mrs. Reynolds and Mr. Will Young had a nice game of cards after Tea.



August, Thursday 11, 1864
        The cry is still no news from Va. Ga. or Mobile - all still holding their own, but no advance from either side. Gen. Dick Taylor has crossed the Mississippi with a heavy force. Forrest sent a great many Wagons to meet him, two Bateries to protect his march until they can form a junction. The Yanks are still advancing at Oxford, last accounts. Gen. Chalmers fought them at Abbeville, fell back, our forces under Gen. Forrest are at Lafayette Springs. The Yanks are in large numbers, yet we are confident of checking their wicked course before they go much farther. A rumor that Gen. Lee had been sent to Ga. while our President was left in command of Va. A nice game of cards after Tea, Lou and I were teribly beaten.


August, Sunday 14, 1864
        A bright and beautiful day - I did not come to Columbus this morning - Mrs. Johnson & Mary Poullium came in to Church, brot me a note from Tate saying she would send Johnie out for me this eve. Lou and I spent the morning alone, in the octagon. Mrs. Reynolds writing to Maj. Reynolds, Mr. Willie Young making preperations to depart for Forrest's command. We had all just gone to our rooms, and ready for a nap, when Johnie came. I concluded to come in and make arrangements with Tate what to do. John & I had a delightful drive in -
        Mary and Robert both look badly, met Mr. Holmes just from home, left all well - Great deal of sickness in Memphis - Tate and the girls go to Macon on the train tomorrow morning - I have concluded to stay with Lou Young, will return tomorrow. I am almost crazy with my ear tonight - Parlor full of company, I excused myself - and of all the miserable places, I have


landed in it tonight. Hal, Nannie & I all in one bed, and the warmest night imagineable -



August, Monday 15, 1864
        Tate, Nannie and Hal, with the rest of their crowd, left for Macon on the 9 o'clock train. I left the Hotel after their departure and went over to Mrs. Long's to spend the day with Therese. My ear pained me teribly all day, I felt very badly after Tate left, but she promised to Telegraph me if they moved. Col. Young sent for me about two, o'clock. I had a lonely ride, met Duke about half way, he arrived safe with my trunk. Lou met me and I was really happy to be with her again. We all went to bathe as soon as I arrived, Judge Clayton came out, brot me a telegram from Tate telling me to come to Macon immediately, they leave tomorrow for Grenada.
        I am almost crazy with my ear, so Col. Young Dispatched "Not well enough to travel." I am suffering so much, no sleep for me tonight.


August, Thursday 25, 1864
        After my failure to remodel Lou's hat on yesterday, Mrs. Johnson kindly offered to assist me, so she spent the morning making the crown. I then took it, finished puting it together, and trimed it, after finishing it looked quite nice - and Lou did not make so much sport over her milliner's misfortunes. I finished Maj. Young's socks, with Lou's assistance, we played backgammon, and altogether had a very pleasant day. Mary Poullaim and I improved very much in our swimming. Col. Young got back today from his Plantation, and is quite sick tonight from fatigue.
        Bad news from Va. and Mobile, Fort Morgan surrendered and we have been
defeated at Fredericksburg. God grant the days may brighten for our poor bleeding Confederacy. No news from home yet -



August, Friday 26, 1864
        I had a regular seige today with Mrs. Reynolds hat, and did not finish it. Mrs. Johnson and I both failed to make a brim, I retreated to my room in disgust, the other girls were all enjoying a nice nap. We all went to bath, Mary Lou and I improved very much in swiming , not able to swim across the Pond yet. As usual, we played Euchre after Tea. Lou and I were beaten only one game - No news of importance from the Armys -



August, Saturday 27, 1864
        I began on the hat immediately after breakfast, succeeded in forming a very nice brim, and Mrs. Reynolds was pleased, I do not think I was cut out for a Miliner or hat maker. Poor Lou, is loosing all her hair, and it really distresses me, I wish I could remedy the evil. We all went to bathe, I improved a little in swiming , not confidence enough yet. Mr. Clapp and Mr. Chambers arrived at Waverly this evening - Lou and I played against Mrs. Reynolds and Mr. Clapp at Whist - spent a very pleasant eve, returned early, and I venture to say Lou and I will enjoy it, as we did not sleep any last night for the Musquitoes



August, Sunday 28, 1864
        Lou and I as usual too late for breakfast, We all spent most of the morning in the Octagon - Mr. Clapp and Col. Chambers making themselves
very entertaining - I do like Mr. Clapp so much -
        Lou and I came up stairs, Lou occupied her time in writing to her Bro. Vallie - I of course in sleeping -
        We had rather a discussion at dinner about Southern people taking the Oath of Allegiance to the Yankee Gov. Mr. Clapp had the advantage of the discussion, his view being strictly against it. The gentleman returned to Columbus after dinner, we spent the evening in slumber. Mr. & Mrs. Hamilton took Tea, and spent the evening with us. I do feel so uneasy about home, no news decisive from any portion of our Armyies



August, Monday 29, 1864
        The day passed as usual - Waverly is always pleasant to me. Spent the day in Kniting , backgammon, sleeping &c. We had a delightful time in the Pond, have not succeeded in swiming across yet. Good news from Va. today - Lee has had a great Victory, capturing 2,000 Yanks, killing and wounding large numbers - Report of the Siege of Petersburg being abandoned for the present. Nothing later from Mobile, Forrest or Ga. Lincoln is trying to arrange to send peace delegates, only for policy in the next election, of course we can never agree with him in our terms of peace.
        No news from home - had a nice game of Euchre after tea. Lou, dear girl, I cannot but love you too well -



August, Tuesday 30, 1864
        Mrs. Reynolds and Mrs. Johnson went to Columbus this morning, Col. Young also. Lou, Mary L. and I had quite a nice time although alone. The Miss's Burt called. Mr. Clapp came out with Col. Young on his way to Holly Springs. We all had a short bath this eve, as the Gentleman wanted to go
in. Mrs. Young and Maj. Henderson took Tea, and we all spent a very pleasant eve. I sat up very late writing to Capt. Henderson -
        No news from any portion of the Country -



August, Wednesday 31, 1864
        After all my sitting up so late, Mr. Clapp went off and forgot my letter, or at least, I failed to awake in time to give it to him.
        We have had a pleasant day, as usual, to me each day is delightful at Waverly - there is not much variety, but 'tis always pleasant - We all together had a nice bath, although 'twas very cold. I was really timid and foolish in the Water, tried to cross, but did not get more than half way, hope I will succeed some time.
        Still no news from home, and nothing different from the Army's -