Wednesday March 1st.
            The first day of Spring! A gloomy opening of the bright season. It is not cold, but dark and rainy. Father has been obliged to defer his trip on account of the weather and is waiting for a fair day. There was a rumor afloat yesterday that a negro regiment was marching from Branchville to garrison Columbia - Heavens - have we not suffered enough? I do not believe it but the very thought is enough to make one shudder. If father succeeds in laying in a supply of food we will probably remain here, unless father is ordered away.
        Communication will soon be opened with Augusta and other towns and probably with Col. St. John. As long as we stay here we have the comforts of home and are among friends. Then if the Government works are moved back I might get some kind of employment.
March 2nd
            - It still continues damp and cloudy with no immediate prospect of a favourable change. I have not gone back to study but feel heartily ashamed of myself for not doing so. I have resolved not to be idle any longer but to go back to my books and take up again some solid reading I had planned before all this excitement. This afternoon father called me downstairs to help him rearrange the books. They had been packed in boxes before the Yankees came, for removal but father finding it impossible to take them off judged they would be safer in the cases as the soldiers would tumble them out in search of valuables, so just before he left he had Henry put them back. Of course he placed them on the shelves pell-mell without any regard to order. I had a good laugh today with Sallie. I mentioned in my account of the shelling of the town on Thursday that the man Davis brought me a box of feathers. I had laid them - away and did not think of them till today, when I came across them and we were looking over them selecting some that I thought would make a pretty fan. Near the bottom of the box Sallie spied a folded paper - a leaf from some note-book. She opened it. At the top of the page was a rude drawing of two hearts - this the note said, "portrayed two hearts surrounded by
rosebuds" (the rosebuds being entirely imaginary) "May they (continued the note) prove an emblem of our hearts, may they be joined by the golden links of friendship and may the rosebuds of life entwine them and though many hundred miles separate us may we be always firm friends." Well, if that individual is not a queer fish I never met one. He was pretty rough specimen, but if we owe anything to his kindness of heart, I ought not to be too hard on his coarseness. Of course Sallie got a lot of fun out of it, showing it in high glee to father who was greatly amused - over it. The fellow had remarkably keen insight into character. The evening he talked with me after father was gone - he hit off his character wonderfully except in one or two points - remarkable considering how absolutely father differed from himself. He read both mother's and my character too. Mine, except for the flattery he threw in, was very correct also.
Tuesday March 7th.
            - Last Friday (3rd) we received two pieces of good news. In the first place Dr. Pratt arrived with four wagons to our relief. Two hours after receiving father's letter he started. In that short time provisions were hastily collected and clothing for father, Uncle John and Capt. Green - father has been wearing a pair of blue trousers taken from a dead Yankee soldier at the hospital and given him by one of the doctors.
        The officers of the Nitre Bureau contributed, throwing in shirts, collars, socks, etc., - When he got to Prof. Holmes in Edgefield that generous-hearted friend set to work and loaded up a wagon with bacon, corn, clothing, etc., and sent word we must all come to his home right away. Such friends in times like these of scarcity and selfishness are indeed to be appreciated. Dr. Pratt left so hurriedly that he did not even go home to bid his wife goodbye - only despatched her a note. He says no one in Augusta has the slightest conception of the desolation here - they suppose that only Main Street was burned, and that, the Yankees said, was done accidentally by our own soldiers in destroying cotton! As soon as the state of things was better understood contributions poured in. Our necessities are supplied for the present and we need not now draw rations from the town as we have been doing ever since the fire.
The mayor issues rations to 7000 people - all that is left of a population of about 30,000. The original population of 12,000 was enormously increased since the war by refugees and other sources.
        The other piece of good news was received last night - that Uncle John was paroled in Chester. Aunt Josie's joy was unbounded and her excitement brought on a severe attack of palpitation of the heart. Last evening she received a letter from him. He is within 27 miles of Columbia, but is waiting to get a conveyance. One of his feet is so sore from making a march of 50 miles with the Yankees that he cannot walk it. Chester was not burned. The Yankees did not go either there or to Yorkville. The greater part of Winnsboro' was destroyed and the whole of Lexington - in fact every town and village in their track. Dr. pratt stayed with us while here. Father giving up his expedition down the river, returned with him to Augusta yesterday to see what he could do about getting supplies from there. We expect him back in one or two days. We can hear nothing from our army. For the first time we are without the excitement of daily telegraphic news and I miss the breakfast-table discussions of the war news and the movements of the forces. We live in absolute ignorance while our fate is being decided, and speedy peace and long-continued war are trembling in the balance. At all events we miss perhaps a thousand unfounded and conflicting rumors. We are hoping for intervention, but that may mean humiliating concessions. If recognition meant the opening of our ports only that would be all we would ask. Once freely supplied with materials for war we would soon be independent. That is all we need.
Wednesday March 8th.
            - Uncle John got home last night. It has been raining all day and I have not been to see him. He is confined to the house with his foot.
        I am back at my books again and read a great deal. I do nothing else, except of course knitting which does not interfere at all with my reading. I have gone at old Gibbon again and mean to finish him.


Am also reading Hitchcock - especially in the metaphysical portions of the latter I need father so much. I hope he will not have to go off again. I do want to to get steadily and systematically at work again.
Friday March 10th.
            - Today is the day of Fasting and prayer appointed by the president. It rained so hard all the morning however that none of us went to church. Even if the weather - were favorable I could not go as I am not at all well, nor have been for several days, but only began to feel like giving up yesterday. Nevertheless I went, in spite of threatening clouds, to see Uncle John in the afternoon. He had a hard time with the Yankees - was not allowed a blanket to sleep on - no fire, and had to march over a hundred miles with them. He saw one of his own negroes, Peter, on horseback while he was plodding on foot. On the whole though he looks very well and feels more like himself except for his foot. Aunt Josie was sick in bed. Uncle John said that while he was marching along a Yankee officer rode beside him and asked - "What will you Southerners do when we have marched victoriously through Virginia and taken Richmond?" - "I think Gen. Lee may have something to say to that", he replied - "you have him to meet yet." - "Well suppose we defeat and disperse his army?" - "I suppose then we will have to resort to Guerilla warfare." The officer looked surprised and shocked - "Why cannot you yield?" he asked. Uncle John shrugged his shoulders and said we would resort to anything rather than give up. "Well," replied the Yankee, "I hope the South won't do anything of that kind, for of course in that event we would not spare or respect your women."
March 11th.
            - A Courier last night brought the news of the fall of Richmond - or at least its' evacuation. We have heard rumors to this effect for some time so we were in a measure prepared for it. It is so hard to believe. People talk about its being the best move - that now we will "catch" Sherman etc., etc., - it seems nonsense to me. The fact remains that our capital - the great bone of contention for which the Yankees have struggled in vain for four years - around which so many bloody battles have been fought, has fallen at last. I feel as if the end had
come, and utterly heartsick - and yet have become so accustomed to disaster that nothing overwhelms me, not even this. It only somewhat deepens the gloom. We can not be conquered - that is unthinkable - but there are bitter days, and we are passing through a dark cloud. Sherman marched through Georgia - Savannah fell - I thought he would be opposed here - the president promised to defend South Carolina - Sherman swept on unresisted, devasting, burning. He holds Charleston - has burned Columbia - left his whole track a smouldering desert. Now Richmond has fallen. Where is a ray of hope? Only to Gen. Lee and his poor little half-starved army can the people look - yet an army that has never suffered defeat - a contrast to the Western army.
Sunday March 12th.
            - It is a calm bright spring day - warm, balmy and quiet. The Campus is quite green with the springing grass and the tall elms are budding. The birds are singing again and as we walked home from Church this morning we gathered blue hyacinths and yellow daffodils from among the blackened ruins. Spring no longer looks gay and bright as it used to in the fair town buried in trees and gardens, and even where the foliage is not destroyed the bursting green will make a sad contrast with the melancholy ruins. In church this morning all looked so familiar - the congregation full, Dr. Palmer in his place again, choir and organ - that sitting there it was hard to realize all was so changed. Coming out the ruins all around struck afresh with strangeness and unreality. We have some 120 of Wheeler's cavalry here for a time, but they are going to leave. They were drawn up in the street this morning backs.
        Yesterday morning I spent with Aunt Jane, who is thickly broken out with measles, more consequences of Walter's visit to us with them. In the afternoon I went to see Miss Jane and Miss Sophia Reynolds, and afterwards to Madame D'ovilliers'. Nothing was talked of but that dreadful night. Poor little Madame, how she did jabber in her broken English - I will try to look up my friends, but many left before the surrender and most of the rest are burnt out and I do not know
where to find them. Some (among them the Carrolls and Bauskets) went to Winnsboro' and met the Yankees there.
March 14th.
            - Richmond has not fallen! Petersburg has been given up and Lee has drawn in his lines and sent 10,000 men to Johnston. Aunt Jane has heard from Cousin John. She has been very uneasy about him, for when he came that fatal Friday to tell her goodbye the Yankees were only two blocks behind him, at the State house. He barely escaped by the fleetness of his horse but had to ride 25 miles through a deserted country to join his command and thinks he would have starved but for the large lunch Aunt Josie stuffed in his haversack as he left. Aunt Josie tried to look up some of our lost clothing. The authorities have taken everything stolen by the negroes or given them by the Yankees and exposed them in some building for identification by owners. Hearing that many articles were taken from the Nitre Bureau negroes, Aunt Josie went forth with high hopes, but all she recovered was a portion of one of her dresses and the flounce of my green embroidered silk. She and Cousin Lula lost even more heavily than mother and I in clothing, for we only sent off our best things but they sent everything except two winter dresses apiece and hardly a change of underclothing, and not an article to begin Summer with. Our underclothing was all of homespun and our stockings home-knit, so we kept them. The silk dresses so carefully treasured during the war are entirely irreplaceable. Aunt Josie and Cousin Lula lost 24 before them. How are we to get clothes? - when even calico is from $25 to $30 a yard - There is a report in town that Sherman has been killed, but that is far too good to be true. Another report is that Hampton fell in with part of his wagon train and captured - the citizens who left Columbia with Sherman's army and recovered much silver stolen here. The Yankees said they had not anywhere met with such quantities of plate and valuables and plunder as they found in Columbia - that it seemed the richest place they had struck. They told the people of Cheraw (which was also burned) that they had treated Columbia worse than they should have done, but Sherman
told them when they crossed the river that he would not restrain them, but gave them license to sack, pillage and burn the "Capital of Secession" as they chose. (Several pages missing)
Saturday March 18th.
            - We are looking for father home now - we expected him yesterday or today. At last we have received some tidings from Charleston. Some people unable any longer to endure the state of things they have found their way on foot to Columbia. The reign of terror they describe is unperalled even in this barberous war. The city is garrisoned by negro troops who, unrestrained, perpetrate every barbarity, until at length their outrages reached such a pitch that their officers were obliged to some extent to interfere - 30 men were shot for violating women. In the surrounding country affairs are even worse than in the city - the slaves turned loose and wildest anarchy reigns. When some of Foster's negro troops arrived in Georgetown the same excesses were begun there. A Mr. Middleton, 80 years old, was ordered by ruffians to leave his house. He was alone, the family being here, - he deprecated their cruelty urging that he was old and had never taken any part in the war. They said they knew he was darned old rebel, and ordered him to get out. He begged for a little time to move some effects - this being refused he went to his room, put a few clothes in a pillowcase and taking a blanket from his bed, left the house. The negroes took his blanket from him. He watched his burning house till it was consumed and then, taking the road to Columbia, walked the entire distance from Georgetown, reaching this place a day or two ago. The people are fearing that a negro garrison may be sent here. If such fears should be realized we must leave if we have to walk to Augusta. It is rumored that the Yankee gunboats are coming the river to complete their work of destruction of Columbia by blowing up the State house. We hear so many wild and dreadful rumors. Mrs. Bird passed through yesterday on her way from Richmond to Augusta. She says the deepest despondency prevails there on account of the giving up of Charleston and Columbia and the expectation that Richmond will share the same fate. Charlotte
still holds out. We know almost nothing - the only reliable news from couriers and they come so rarely. It is wonderful the avidity with which every scrap of news or even rumor from the outer world is seized upon in this forlorn town. Mr. Pope has just got in. He says he only escaped by passing himself off as a preacher, and was several times told by the Yankees that they had caught tax-collector Pope. Most of them spoke exultingly of having burned Columbia - one only expressed regret because "it was such a pretty town". On his inquiring the cause of the conflagration, they at first repeated the story of the whiskey, but one fellow said frankly that he might as well tell the truth - that Sherman had ordered them to burn it - that they expected to burn it, and they did burn the the hole of secession. Mr. Pope says that they had not however expected to take it, for Beauregard had telegraphed Hardee to come to his aid, and that scoundrel paid no attention to the telegram. Mr. Pope says all the Yankees he talked with concurred in unqualified admiration for the pluck and dignity of the Columbia women. Through all the frightful night they did not see a tear or hear one complaint, and they did not think they could ever conquer the South if the men were animated by the same spirit as the women of South Carolina. Mr. Pope asked them if they thought to whip the South by marching through devastating the country, unopposed except by women and children. The Yankees replied that they did not expect to whip our armies, but meant to starve us out. "And can you do that?" he asked - the Yankee said, "sometimes I doubt it, " for everywhere we go we find such quantities of provisions. You Southerners have a rich country." Telegraphic communication will be opened with Richmond in a few days and then I hope


we will hear regularly from the armies in N. Carolina and Virginia and also what has become of Thomas. We are also soon to have a tri-weekly paper edited by Gilmer Sims and call "The Phoenix"! I had saved almost a regular file of daily papers from 1862, but in the confusion of the fire they were emptied out of the trunk, scattered and destroyed.
        Mother tried to persuade me to go with her to the depot, but I had no wish to see the dreadful sight. The ruins are filled with the bones of the unfortunates who perished in the explosion, and their mangled remains are scattered around. The gas works too are destroyed beyond repair. When father comes back I think I will walk down to Granby and see the battle field, though there is little to be seen I suppose beyond the breastworks and earth torn up and trees cut by cannon balls. The last news from Johnston was that he had retreated to Raleigh. This arch-retreater will probably retreat till perhaps he retreats to Gen. Lee who may put a stop to his retrograde movement. -