August 1, 1864.
        Go down town, purchase a hat for Georgie and a bonnet for myself. I expect to leave tomorrow for Paducah.
April 2, 1864.
        Busy packing and while packing Capt. Leake and Leslie Browne came. Capt. Leake tells me it is best not to go to


Paducah until he returns, he will see if it is safe for me to go. That I might be arrested. Most of my friends have been sent out of the United States. What a state of affairs! Was such tyranny ever exercised over a people! Surely the demons of the lower regions have been set loose. This man Payne is surely a devil on earth. But there is a home in Heaven for us if we hold out faithful. What is the envy and hate of poor insignificant men if we have the love of God! Capt. Leake has gone and I am disappointed in going but I am used to disappointment. Mr. Hatchett is very kind.
Memphis, Tennessee.
Wednesday, August 3, 1864.
        Busy downtown making purchases preparatory for my banishment to Canada with the rest of my friends. Where my dear Mother and Brother is I don't know, hope I will join them soon.
Thursday, August 4, 1864.
        This is Lincoln's fast day. Seems quite quiet except for the negroes who have possession of the town. The Confederates are killing off the while soldiers so fast it is well to favor the blacks as much as possible to make them fight. The negro is better than these uncivilized, cruel, brutish Yankees. But enough! I dislike to soil my book by mentioning such butchers in it. I feel very unwell. The weather is so sultry and warm it weakens me.
Friday, August 5, 1864.
        None can imagine the anxiety with which I await news from my friends and you, my dear Husband, could you but know the condition of things how much harder could you fight and with what a feeling of revenge would meet the persecutors of your loved ones. I spoke kindly of them, told you to have mercy and believe that many were conscientious in their belief, little thinking they were battling with women and children instead of meeting the enemy face to face and fighting like soldiers for their country. No! gain is their object and theft is their business.
Saturday, August 6, 1864.
        Downtown all morning shopping. As I returned I called at the postoffice and got a letter from Cousin Coleman Woolfolk. He informed me that my dear Mother was well and in Paducah, I am thankful to hear that. My brother is in Vincennes but what are his arrangements and where his family is I don't know. Capt. Leake has not yet returned. Have been going at night to hear Mr. Miller, a Baptist minister who is a fine speaker, I hope I may profit by his teaching.
Sunday, August 7, 1864.
        Went again this morning to hear Mr. Miller preach, Georgie went to Sunday School with Mr. Hatchett. He behaved very well


at church. Went again at night to hear Mr. Miller who says he met Brother Robert on the boat and Nannie in Owensboro. I can't imagine what Nannie is doing there, but my family are so scattered I am not surprised to hear anything. Poor Ma! to think of tearing her from her children in her old age when she has lived only for them. If they have banished Brother Robert, it is, I fear, a final farewell between my dear Mother and her oldest child. She is 69 years old and cannot expect to be long on this earth.
Tuesday, August 9, 1864.
        I did not get off on the "City Alton." Capt. Leake has not yet returned. Am getting very impatient.
August 10, 1864.
        Hope to hear from home. Feel very badly--have a cold in my head. Quite an excitement in this neighborhood. The dogkiller has been around, and the horse that carries the dead dogs gave out, and they have been whipping him and killing dogs until I am sick at the sight of so much cruelty and heartlessness. He is certainly one of the most cruel wretches I have seen. My hand trembles now from excitement. I wonder what news Mr. Hatchett will bring now for me.
Thursday, August 11, 1864.
        Felt some better this morning, but about noon felt so
badly I had to go to bed. I fear I am going to be sick.
August 12, 1864.
        Spent a restless night. Am out of bed but don't know how long I will be able to keep up. Have heard nothing more from home. Home! Oh, where is home? Friends and relatives gone, home taken. There is no security from such tyrants. This suspense is terrible. I know nothing of any of my family except that they are sent from Paducah. My Mother is in Paducah but whether she will be permitted to stay I don't know.
Saturday, August 13, 1864.
        Capt. Leake has returned. Gives me little satisfaction. Says there is only military despotism in Paducah. Friends dare not recognize a friend on the street. He could do nothing for me. He saw my dearest Mother and Mary and the children when they left Paducah. They were allowed to take only their wearing clothes. They left with proud bearing, not a tear was shed though their hearts were heavy, they did not allow the monster Payne to witness their distress, though he came down to the wharfboat to see them depart, hoping no doubt to see tears and distress and to be pleaded with to be allowed to remain. Thank God! they bore it bravely as every true Southern woman does. I read this morning an article from the
Cairo paper speaking of their departure. The writer must have been some poor, low, unprincipled creature whose standing heretofore has been doubtful. As I read, I became so indignant I felt as if I were a man how quickly would I join the Southern army and how savagely would I fight.
Sunday, August 14, 1864.
        Heard Mr. Miller again, am more and more pleased with him. In the afternoon I went to see Mrs. Turley.
August 15, 1864.
        I am determined to go to Cairo. Slept more last night.
        [Note: A page missing containing dates August 16, 17 and part of Aug. 18th. These pages evidently refer to the members of her family who were banished to Canada by Gen. Payne and Gen. Grant. The diary continues describing the trip of her relatives north to Canada.]
August 18, 1864.
        They found many Southern friends. On crossing the river with the guard, it incensed the British authorities. They say they had no right to cross. They met some of Morgan's men, escaped prisoners, who were very indignant that ladies should be sent under Negro guards. But nothing surprises me now.
I hope my family will get on comfortably. Some kind gentleman from Detroit, Michigan, invited them to make his house their home, but I believe they will remain for awhile in Canada. I am waiting to see Coleman Woolfolk before deciding what step to take next. Mr. Scanland went down to dinner with us. He was very polite.
Friday, August 19, 1864.
        While in the parlor last night Mrs. Gus Browne and Frank McCloud came in much to my surprise. Mrs. Browne informs me that Gen. Payne will not permit me to return to Paducah, that he will send Mrs. Wallace and Mrs. Woolfolk to Central America. Have been looking for Coleman Woolfolk to come and tell me what is best to do. I spent a most unpleasant evening, servants very remiss. Some time before I could get a servant and then my door had no fastening. But I slept very well after I did go to bed. Gen. Payne's son has taken my house, it is filled with young men, and I suppose is the scene of dissappation of all kinds. Well! it is but my earthly home and would have occupied by me but a short time. True, it is associated with some of my happiest hours, it was my home, the birthplace of my only child. I have been happy there, and it grieves me to know a place so sacred to me should be desecrated by such people. I fear many things I prize are in the hands of those unprincipled fellows, letters,


etc., they have gone from me, past and gone as almost every old association, but these people. We all will soon pass away, and the places that know us will know us no more, so it matters little what we have in this world.
Saturday, August 20, 1864.
        Last night after tea I had the pleasure of a call from Mr. Charles Riche. He gave me much news. Cousin Richard brought me two letters to Ma and one from Brother Robert in Windsor, Canada and one from Dr. Stearnes. I have sent them to her and written her to come down here. Cousin Richard and I came to see Mrs. McCauly and ask her to take us for a week or ten days. She consented. I came this afternoon and found Emerson Ethridge boarding here. He is very sociable and entertaining. He is more I think opposed to the Administration than to Rebellion.
Sunday, August 21, 1864.
        I have spent most of the day in my rooms. Have not felt well. What a lonely life I have led for the past few weeks. I can take no interest in anything or anybody. About 4 o'clock this afternoon my dear Mother came. I was not expecting her. She looked better than I had hoped. Georgie was out walking but knew her as soon as he saw her.
August 22, 1864.
        Ma and I slept but little last night, talked most of the night. We think it best to go to Louisville as Gen. Payne
can send me from this place.
August 23, 1864.
        Go down to Cousin Richard's office where my trunks are and look them over.
August 24, 1864.
        Left at 12 in the cars.
August 25, 1864.
        Travelled all night, had a severe headache, could not sit up. There was no gentleman with us and we had to change cars twice, but I get along better than I expected knowing no one. Georgie as usual made friends. Arrived at Louisville at 6 o'clock, found all well at Cousin Rebecca Tyler's. Cousin Liza Gwaltney and Amanda called to see me.