April 3, 1864.
        S.B. Sunshine. Hattie, Mrs. Johnson & two nieces join our party. Very pleasant party on board. Our trunks are searched. Much sport and some fear--Mr. Simpson a friend of Hattie's very attentive.
April 5, 1864.
        Mrs. Johnson's nieces get off. The Guerrillas are on the bank--threaten to shoot--the ladies only prevent. Hurrah for Jeff Davis & the S.C.--for which some handkerchiefs are waved.
April 6, 1864.
        Arrive at Vicksburg, find some friends--Mr. Bernard, an old acquaintance of Phil's--go up in the town--make some purchases, everything very high, get some Southern music. Find no difficulty in getting passes.
April 7, 1864.
        Much hurry and bustle to get ready for the cars. We part with our kind friends, leave at 8 o'clock on the cars for Big Black. Reach that place, feel very disconsolate, pulling up
the bank with our heavy baskets, et cetera. Soldiers all around us but no assistance. We have had so many escorts seems quite hard to go alone, so up to the Camp--meet Captain Kuhn, very polite, invites us to his tent and takes us to General Dennis. He gives us but little encouragement. Much to our surprise he gives us two ambulances, a wagon, and escort. Captain Kuhn goes with us as far as the Confederate pickets. We go for several miles and stop and send a flag of truce. While waiting it rained furiously--trunks all wet--soon the escort returns with Confederate soldiers who permit us to pass. We got to Mr. Cook's house five miles from Big Black--Big Black very high--dangerous crossing-- one of our horses fell--part of bridge broken--next morning fell in. At Mrs. Cook's met the first Confederate troops-- the first I saw & who helped me out of the ambulance was a young Lieut. Wren--handsome Louisianian--how strangely I felt--then they met--Federals & Confederates--shook hands-- both drank to our success--apparently good friends. Oh the horror of this war. We parted with the Feds who had been very kind indeed to us. Came in and talked a while with the Southern soldiers--find we have to remain here for several days--have sent to Gen. Armstrong for conveyances. George seems to be delighted to get to Dixie Land--is quite a pet with all.


April 10, 1864.
        A beautiful day--will take a walk. Oh the desolation-- beautiful plantations laid waste--where we are staying they were worth one million of dollars & now she is using pewter spoons for which she paid 50 cents. The Federals took silver, furniture, everything but house and left her without even a mouthful of food for her children. We have just taken a walk of four miles--oh! what a scene of desolation and destruction, plantation after plantation destroyed, nothing left but the brick chimneys and the ruins--cotton strewn on the ground as far as the eye can see. Near Edwards' Depot, may be seen pieces of wagons, cannons, and the cars that have been destroyed, all giving evidences of war and its terrible effects. Some of the beautiful shrubbery still remains and all is now green and fresh, looking pretty, notwithstanding the surroundings. I have gathered some flowers off the battlefield. We were near where General Tilghman was killed and General Bowen died. Mrs. Bowen was with us, she spoke of her husband during the walk. Mrs. Cook's was the last house he stayed at, was taken a few miles on and died at some house in the Confederate lines. Insisted on being taken into his own lines or perhaps he would have lived. We went to the Confederate Camp and saw several men; Lieutenant Snodgrass and Lieutenant Wren remained for an hour and returned to dinner, the lieutenants returning with us. In the evening Major Grant joined us--had a pleasant evening
some sport with Nannie's picture--young Wren fancied it, and I gave it to him. He had writings drawn up by which he pledged himself to marry her if she was willing, 30 days after the Confederacy was acknowledged, and he wished her to consider herself engaged.
        Wrote Mama a long letter. Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Boone arrive.
April 11, 1864.
        Mrs. Bowen decides to go in with the ladies to Vicksburg, hope she will return all safe. Major Grant came this morning and he, Mally, Eddie, Georgie and I took a walk. We went over the ground where they fought when Vicksburg was taken. Major Grant, Lt. Wren, Lt. Snodgrass with some soldiers spent the day with us, quite a pleasant day, playing on the piano and singing. Hattie, Mally and I had quite a flirtation with the Maj. Hattie & I waltzed around the room with him. In the afternoon Captain Moorman came to see us, old acquaintance of Phil's and Cousin John's. About 7 o'clock 3 ladies from St. Louis came in, one 70 years old--said she came to be buried in Southern soil. We are crowded--four beds in a room.
April 12, 1864.
        Early this morning Major Grant and Lt. Wren came to see
us soon after a flag of truce came in. Capt. Crains and Lt. Clark of the U. S. Army came with it. Federals and Confederates chatting, smoking and joking together--all, I think, more in favor of a friendly chat than a fight. They asked me to sing and play for them, all sang together, they soon left. Major Grant and Lt. Wren spent the day. We devoted ourselves to their amusement, played, sang and danced with them--we laughed at our endeavors to amuse them, poor follows, they need all the favors we can bestow. Lt. Wren bid us goodbye late this evening. I don't think we will see him again. He said he had not spent so much time with ladies since he entered the service, and seemed to enjoy it so much, was very sad at parting with us, and indeed we shall miss him very much; he is a splendid fellow, noble and brave. God bless him and protect him from harm! Mrs. Bowen has returned. She did not bring the things I sent for, feel much disappointed. House crowded with ladies on their way South. They crossed the Big Black in a skiff, found no conveyance to bring them on, walked here four miles. I think that there is a probability of blockade of ladies it is almost impossible to get conveyances. We have been here nearly a week, hope soon to hear from General Adams. I feel gloomy tonight. Oh! dearest Mother, dearest Husband, dear friends, all, where are you? Hattie and Mally seem somewhat disheartened also. I hope tomorrow
will bring us some hopeful tidings. We have had beautiful weather. Georgie was not well last night or this morning. I hope he will be well tomorrow. Lt. Wren and I talked much of Nannie, he seems quite to earnest.
April 13, 1864.
        Quite a number of ladies for the South here, all waiting anxiously for a conveyance. Mally has hailed a wagon and goes as far as Clinton tonight, and several others go with her. Mrs. Bowen goes with Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Boone after dinner. Hattie and I become desperate. Major Grant is very kind and says he will get a conveyance for us. He sends to Dr. Williamson who charges us $50.00. We leave Mrs. Cook's at 3 o'clock and the Maj. goes with us. We pass Baker's Creek and go over the ground where Gen. Tilghman was killed. Oh! how destitute everything looks. For ten miles the trees are torn by shot and ball and all along the dead horses are strewn; the scent is dreadful. I can scarcely describe my feelings in passing over the ground where the armies met and fought so desperately. Almost every tree has balls in it, and the branches are torn away from many. The Maj. picked up balls in the road. We travelled until 8 o'clock at night, it was beautiful moonlight. We all stayed at Mr. Thomas', met Mrs. Woodman of New York celebrity, the one who created such a sensation in New York. She was divorced from her husband, a very uninteresting person, I think. They gave us no supper or breakfast.
April 14, 1864.
        Left early this morning. Met Mally at Clinton and she got into our wagon. Maj. Grant left, and we regret his departure very much. He has been exceedingly kind. So many splendid residences destroyed; sometimes we would [see] perhaps the gate left of a beautiful fence, a little remnant of former splendor. On the road we met a former acquaintance of my father's Mr. Wales (Waler) of Shelbyville. He told us that his son-in-law, Mr. Radford, married his daughter, whom we found, was an old acquaintance. We called to see him, and he was very pleased to see us. We met the Government wagon that had been sent for us. The Sargeant got in our wagon and came into Jackson with us. He was very angry at a rich Southern man charging us $50.00 for the wagon. We got to Jackson about 1 o'clock, quite tired after our jolting. Col. Dunken called and knows Phil is well. Mally went home with him. In the afternoon Mrs. and Miss Wharton called to see us very agreeable ladies, want us to spend tomorrow with them-- We are quite tired, retire.
April 15, 1864.
        This is my wedding day, married eight years today. How I wish I could be with my husband.
        The sargeant has gone for Mrs. Bowen, and we hope to get off tomorrow. As we went down the stairs on our way to Gen.
Wharton's (State General), we met Dr. Boyd. He was delighted to see us and invited us to his house. We had a very pleasant day at Gen. Wharton's, suffered some with cold. While there Maj. Grant came in to see us. He returns to Mrs. Smith's this evening. As we came home we called to see Mally at Col. Duncan's. How different is this evening from the evening of the 15th. of April, 1856! Here I am among strangers, seeking my husband--transportation difficult--everything very high, don't know how long it will be before I see Phil, am fearful my money will not hold out as my $100. bills are useless. Could we have looked into futurity eight years ago, how sad would our wedding have been to know we were being united so soon to part and to have our country in such a condition. But I pray God all will soon be peace and loved ones again united. My precious boy is a noble fellow--has behaved nicely today, is quite impatient to see his papa. After tea the Misses Dudley called to see me, friends of Brother George. They came to ask me to stay with them while here. They were exceedingly kind.
April 16, 1864.
        Am looking for Dr. Boyd. Miss Dudley called again to ask me to go home with her--she was exceedingly kind. Dr. Boyd came and Hattie, Mally and I with the children went home with him. Crossed Pearl River, was very much frightened, pulled
across with hooks, several persons have been drowned. Dr. and Mrs. Boyd gave us a warm welcome. Have a headache from long fasting detained so long on the bank of the river.
April 17, 1864.
        Hattie and Mally take a ride on horseback. Dr. Boyd says he will send us to Meridian in a carriage. Sunday evening took a walk in the woods, beautiful flowers and honeysuckle growing wild. This is what they call Mississippi swamps, a rather fine swamp. How I wish Nannie was here to enjoy the walks! How I could enjoy this trip if I knew how all were at home, and my dear Mother was with me. Everyone says our trip to Meridian will be trouble--roads very bad, the same Sherman and his army passed over, houses all burned, have to camp out at night. The Torys and robbers are very numerous, hope we will get through safely. This is a beautiful evening. Oh! what a glorious world, all that is necessary to make us happy and content and yet this beautiful land is flowing with human blood, death, and suffering has become an accustomed sight. Oh! God! when will this sinful strife end? God grant us peace and good will towards one another.
Tuesday, April 19, 1864.
        Left Dr. Boyd's for Meridian, Mally, Hattie, the children and I; Sargeant Posey driving us, a mule drawing the wagon with the trunks. Hattie left her baby with Mrs. Boyd. How kind
the doctor and his wife have been to us. We fared very well and missed nothing but coffee, they use cornmeal parched for coffee, and except for that they live very well. We will now, I fear, find rough fare.
        Pass through Brandon about 12 o'clock, stopped at one and took lunch and enjoyed it very much, good appetites. Find we have to go 13 miles before reaching a house. Travel slowly, the mules being slow and tired, travel until quite late into the night, prospect poor, sing to keep up our spirits. Reach a house at 8 o'clock, beg for admission, but are refused by a man named Easton. 3/4 mile from Morton. We told him we were travel-worn, our children sleepy, our mules broken down, while talking to him one of the carriage mules fell down. We told him we only wanted shelter. He then asked us where we were going. We replied "to see our husbands." He said, "A great time to go to your husbands," which so exasperated us that we whipped up our mules and started for Morton. There our mules gave out. The sargeant went off in search of a house but to no effect. While the sargeant was absent, the wagon driver cut the sick mule's mouth, so that he bled profusely We then went into Mr. Binney's house, a gentlemen from Louisiana. He, finding we could get no further, said he would do the best he could, but could give us no bed. We were thankful that his wife, a very nice lady, had a bed made on the floor in which Mally, Eddie, Hattie, and Fanny slept, Georgie
and I taking the sofa. We went to bed supperless about 12 o'clock.
April 20, 1864.
        Slept badly, got our faces washed, found one mule in a poor condition, mouth bleeding very much, we can't stop it. We feel very discouraged, take a rough breakfast, but don't enjoy anything we are so anxious about the mule. It seems some better. We have concluded to take the road to Enterprise. The mule is so weak it can scarcely pull. Hattie drives, we walk two miles, stop at a cabin and will rest here until 2 o'clock, then go to Hillsboro, a distance of 10 miles. We took a snack and gave $1.00 for a quart of meal for the sick mule, which seems better. Come to the village by 6 o'clock very pleasant ride, roads are not near so bad as we expected, but the country seems an utter waste, nothing for food for horses or humans. The same cry is heard from house to house, "The Yankees have destroyed all I had." We seem to have quite a comfortable house to stay in tonight. They brought us a small table bowl in which to wash our faces and told us their washbowls had been broken by the Yankees. That cry will haunt this country for many a day. We hope to make an early start in the morning.
April 21, 1864.
        Another beautiful day. We certainly have been very fortunate in having pleasant weather and so far have been agreeably disappointed in the roads. I hope we may have a pleasant trip today. We were very comfortable last night, they charged us $20. each. This is a very pretty place-- beautiful lawn. Just after leaving Hillsboro, I saw a Confederate soldier running to the carriage, I looked and to our surprise and joy saw it was Johnny Saunders (Dr. Saunders) he was so delighted to see us. He asked, "Have you any letters for me?" We said, "No." Poor fellow, the tears came into his eyes, but he said nothing. I would have given much to have had a letter for him. While talking to him, Capt. Sheppard, "Willie Sheppard" and Capt. Dawson of Ky. rode up, and we had a pleasant social time, all so truly glad to see each other. They rode on some distance with us. We talked and sang for them, Georgie rode all the way with Capt. Dawson. He was delighted. At one o'clock we took our dinner, and they dined with us and enjoyed the sundries and cake very much. We regretted to part with them, but they promised if possible to meet us at Enterprise and go with us to Mobile. At night we stayed with Mrs. Evans, a very comfortable place, beautiful yard and everything neat. Our fare very good; tea and coffee with butter and biscuit. We met there some nice
people from Tennessee, the gentleman was a minister and before retiring we had prayers. It was refreshing to hear a prayer offered once more. It has been 5 weeks since we left home and we have heard no minister discourse since then. It seemed quite strange to hear a prayer offered for our beloved South after being so long in Yankeedom and hearing the "Union" prayed for.
April 22, 1864.
        Another pleasant day. We asked for our bill, and it was $25. all included, very reasonable. We have traveled very slowly today, the mules very jaded, stopped at a house and rested. I saw a lady who was quite ingenious, making very pretty hats out of palmetto and very prettily ornamented with the same. A pedestrian caught up with us and asked permission to ride in the wagon. We found him a cousin of Mr. Ratcliff's of Paducah, and his name was Isaiah Ratcliff. He seemed quite a nice person. The mules are so weary we shall not be able to reach Enterprise tonight, we walked some distance this evening. We met a gang of negroes with napsacks, and they sent up a rousing cheer for Jeff Davis. We are now at a cabin, and some cavalry are camping near this place. The family seem pleasant people though they dress very plainly in homespun, the girls are pretty. I would so much enjoy this trip if I only could know how my dear Mother is. I feel strong and well and have a great appetite.
April 23, 1864.
        We spent a very comfortable night and met a New Yorker in the service very earnest in the Southern cause, has been living in the South only six years. We crossed the Chickasawha about 12 o'clock and came to Enterprise and found it difficult to find a house to stay even until the cars leave. After some persuasion they consented to take us in but could give us nothing to eat. While consulting as to the best course to pursue, we heard Cousin Ed Woolfolk had come to this place to meet us. It was joyful news, for we were beginning to feel quite helpless, fearing we would find difficulty in taking care of our baggage. Indeed, we were not certain that we would find our friends in Mobile. But now that Cousin Ed has come we will know what to do. We have not seen him, unfortunately, he has gone to meet us and taken a different road, so we missed him. Mally is quite impatient but I think bears it very patiently. I feel quite impatient to see him myself. Oh! where is my husband? It seems so difficult to learn where our husbands are. We have succeeded in getting a house for a short time with the promise of something to eat. Just after dinner Cousin Ed and Henry Jones came. They rushed to meet us, and there was of course, great rejoicing. Henry Jones was delighted to receive his letter I brought and the photographs; tears of gratitude and
pleasure came into his eyes. I never felt so glad that I had a letter. Cousin Ed brought me a letter from Phil, and I am delighted to hear he is in Mobile. We leave tonight at 8 o'clock in the cars. It is pouring down rain and very dark, and Henry Jones carried Georgie to the depot, while Cousin Ed goes with Mally and I. It is dreadful walking, the water over shoe-tops, so dark we can't see where to go, and I fell into two ditches and am wet and muddy to my waist--a very disagreeable time.
April 25, 1864.
        Had a most unpleasant time in the cars, so wet and cold. They made a fire about 12 o'clock, and I dried my clothes and shawls. I don't know what I should have done if a gentleman had not been kind enough to lend me his shawl for Georgie to lie in. We got to Mobile about 9 o'clock. Phil was a little surprised to see us, did not expect to see us until tonight. Met him at the Battle House. Esmondre Browne, Mrs. Davis, Gus Brown, and Mrs. Girard came to see us. In the afternoon we called to see India Brown, she was very pleased to see us. After tea Mrs. Lay called, and I am told that Mr. Girard will take us to the Fort tomorrow.
April 26, 1864.
        We have been disappointed in not going to the Fort. Walked out this afternoon, went up Government Street--very beautiful
residences, flowers, all in bloom, and some of the houses seem almost a mass of roses; the air is perfumed with the odor from the flowers. You meet children and women with waiters of bouquets. The ladies look very handsome with their dark riding dresses and deep pointed cuffs, riding horseback with the officers. Everything presents quite a gay appearance, a great many military men here. After tea Mr. Davis called and spent the evening with us, we had some good music.
April 27, 1864.
        Mr. Davis, Mally, Cousin Ed, Mrs. Lay, Phil, and the children, and I all went to the music store, tried some music. I purchased six pieces for which I gave $20. How dreadfully high everything is! I paid $2.00 for having my shoes cleaned and shawl brushed. I could spend at week here so pleasantly if I could only hear from home. Dear Ma! how often I think of her. We walked out again this evening--what a beautiful city Mobile is, quite a feast to the eye, so many splendid residences. I think it the most beautiful place I have ever seen. The magnolia trees very large and full of bloom just now. Oh! they are beautiful. I would so much like to live here. After tea Mr. Davis came to the parlor, also Mrs. Marable, wife of Dr. Marable, an old friend of Phil's, very nice lady. Had quite an excitement. It seems a lady had
left her husband and he followed her and took her child, age four, from her. Poor woman! I never heard such pleading-- all night she sobbed and wailed--it was truly heartbreaking to hear her.
April 28, 1864.
        Am not very well today. Expected to leave this evening at 4 o'clock. We did not leave as we expected. A more pleasant boat leaves tomorrow. Mr. Ford, my old schoolteacher, called to see me this evening. He lives here. Gen. Clark of Missouri called to see me also; he is a distant relative, a very intelligent man, he has been South since his inability, for the field, from rheumatism. He leaves for Richmond soon, is now a poor man after being worth almost his millions. His wife is not permitted to come South, and all her children are in the army, poor woman. In the General's reply to the question, "Why should the Southerners be taxed and Kentucky and Missouri troops exempt and where was the tax they paid?" replied, "In the best of coin, blood and limbs!" He is a noble man and sent me his card with some nice strawberries. Phil sent us in some oysters. They were very large, but as we had no good dressing for them, I did not enjoy eating them much. Oh! my dear Mother, what would I give to be with you this night! The love of a Mother is very great and oh! so consoling to a broken heart. God only knows the heart's trials, but oh! my
God, Thou who knowest the hearts of Thy people, give me strength to bear with patience the yoke Thou hast seen fit I should bear! Oh! may it better fit me for heaven. Bless my child. If it be Thou will, spare him to me and give me wisdom and strength to bring him up in the way he should go.
April 29, 1864.
        Mrs. Lay called to see us, also Mr. Thad Gibson, met Gen. Clark on the stairway, he bid us goodbye and wished us much pleasure. Went down to the boat, "The Henry J. King," about half past two o'clock. Mobile Bay looked well, especially to us, as we see our men-of-war, vessels and the blockade runners, all on its waters. We have a limited view of the fortifications. Esmondre Brown, Capt. Cook, Capt. Girard come down to see us. Mr. Davis (Lieut.) of Paducah, will go with us to Montgomery. This is the first time I have ever travelled on the Alabama River, quite a pretty stream, went on deck after tea. Mally, Cousin Ed, Phil, and I sang some of our old songs--oh! how it reminded us of old times. Came down stairs, tried the piano, but found it so out of tune, could not play on it. The Captain is very kind, told us to make ourselves at home and order whatever we wished and do as we liked on his boat. He was a Kentuckian! Capt. Harris of Henry County, Kentucky. The boat stopped some time at Choctaw Bluff and we walked through the fortification. They are quite
a curiosity. I felt as if I were in some of the old ruins I have read of, walking through the subterreanean passages, the works are complete. I tried to sleep this afternoon, but it was so extremely warm I could not stay in the room. While I write the perfume of a fine bouquet fills the cabin with a sweet odor.
April 30, 1864.
        Have been busy making a shirt for Phil. We passed Selma about 6 o'clock in the afternoon, and I am sorry we could not go up in town and see the machine shops. They make all kinds of weapons, cannon, et cetera. This is a more rocky country than I expected. The water running down the rocks looks so refreshing, after drinking the warm river water. One of the servants hearing me express a wish for some, took a pitcher and got some from one of the streams. In the afternoon Bishop Wilmer came on board. He is a pleasant gentlemen and does much good among his people. After supper we went on deck and had some music. We sing quite like a travelling troupe, we made a pleasant little home circle, had it not been for the absence of our loved Mother and friends we could have enjoyed it very much. Oh! it seems so far from home. We sang "Our old Kentucky Home" and all were heartsick except the Bishop. Mr. Davis is very agreeable. The captain does


all in his power to make us feel at home. He seems pleased to have us with him. At supper the waiters favored me, it seemed quite like old times to have such attention from the negroes.