July 1, 1864.
        Mrs. Boykin has been here. I let her have my riding dress and Balmoral, she is anxious for my dress also-- our expenses are very great, $15. a day and washing $5. per dress. It takes a fortune to live, Spent the evening with Mrs. Reid. Her daughter is one of the most fascinating girls I ever met.
July 2, 1864.
        No news. I cut two jackets for Georgie out of my bonnet, hope I will get home soon, or also Georgie will suffer for clothes.
Sunday, July 3, 1864.
        Beautiful day, very hot. We went to the Baptist Chapel to attend services. The commencement sermon was delivered by Rev. Mr. Nall, Presbyterian minister. Judge and Mrs. Hopkins of Mobile who are now boarding here, Phil, Georgie and I went together. The music was very good, the girls singing in the choir--the scene was quite imposing, a great crowd was there. The grounds surrounding the "College" were filled with carriages. Tomorrow the exercises begin. I hear the schools here before the war were very fine, and there are quite a number here now, both at the Methodist and Baptist Colleges. Oh! God, could I hear from my dear mother this day. Oh! may we all have that
grace and Christian fortitude to bear with patience our separation. God grant we may meet soon. Are you thinking of me this quiet Sunday evening? All is as still and quiet as if it were night.
July 4, 1864.
        Tuskegee seems to be all excitement. The examinations take place, carriage after carriage passes. I will not attend-- too warm.
July 5, 1864.
        We attended the evening exercises. I have never seen a more beautiful sight; the streets were thronged with pedestrians and carriages, a great many persons came in the cars from different parts of the country. I went to the College in Col. Balfour's carriage with Capt. and Mrs. Conley. We found the house crowded, a great many had to leave, seats had been reserved for us. As I looked around I thought how little this looked like war. The music was splendid, four pianos and an organ with flute accompaniment. Some of the ladies had fine voices and some of the vocal duets were beautiful. The stage was beautifully decorated, the school girls were arranged in order. A chorus was sung in which all the girls joined, from the opera "Daughter of the Regiment," the Confederate flag was waved with a very appropriate speech by one of the girls,
and drums were beat by the girls also. Altogether it was a beautiful sight. The ladies were beautifully dressed, some elegantly. There seems to be much wealth here. The hotel is crowded. Just as many persons come to attend a wedding, great deal of style. I think the Southern ladies dress more in taste than any people I ever know.
July 6, 1864.
        The wedding comes off tonight. A great many officers here to attend it. The bonfires are blazing round the house it looks well. Phil and I go to spend the evening with Col. Balfour, there we have the bonfires also--everything so lighted up it looks gay and bright. Received a letter from Mally.
July 7, 1864.
        The stages, omnibuses and carriages leave today crowded. Most of the visitors have left and Tuskegee will, I suppose, relapse into its former quiet. Capt. and Mrs. Cummings and Major and Mrs. Driver leave tonight. Phil left this morning for Montgomery. In mentioning the concert given by the young ladies of the Baptist College, I failed to mention the sum given by the audience, $1000 for the benefit of Camp Watts. Phil was requested to sing "Brave Boys," and they soon made up a sum. The song was appropriate and calculated to appeal to the feelings.
Tuskegee
July 8, 1864.
        Tuskegee has again resumed its usual quiet. Capt. and Mrs. Cummings left in the stage last night, and Mrs. Conly sent for me to come and spend the day, I could not stay all day, but sat all the morning with her. She is anxious for us to stay with her. I saw in the papers this morning an account of the deplorable condition of my home. Oh! God, spare my mother and relatives to me. I feel so sad! I received the hat I ordered for Brother Robert. I gave $60 for it, very pretty. Felt so sad this evening. I went to see Mrs. Battle. Phil did not come. Oh, I feel so lonely. Wish Miss Emma Reed would come to stay with me. Just as I write she comes. She is an exceedingly intellectual girl.
July 9, 1864.
        Busy packing my trunk. Col. and Mrs. Balfour insist upon our going there and spending some time. Phil returns from Montgomery, Col. Short has again disappointed him, wishes him to pay dollar for dollar in greenbacks. He is very angry, told him he would beg before he would get a cent from him. I went to Mrs. Battle's who said she would get some of my things. Mrs. Hopkins was very kind, she went to see Mrs. Battle and told her the value of the things. Mrs. Boykin who worried me
about letting her have some of my things and got them for little or nothing, would not take the things I wanted her to take. We were anxious to get out of the hotel but did not have the money. I sent a basket of things for which she gave me $660. I felt dreadful at the idea of selling clothing. Mrs. Battle was very delicate in the matter. About six o'clock in the evening Mrs. Balfour sent her carriage for us, she gave me a warm welcome.
July 10, 1864.
        Quiet Sunday but I shall not go to church as it is too far to walk. Look for Col. Balfour home.
July 11, 1864.
        Go to Mrs. Kelly's for some articles I left, meet Mrs. Hopkins just as she is about to leave for Camp Watts to take charge of the hospitals. Hope we will meet again some day. The old judge seems to feel real regret at parting with us. Col. Balfour has returned. We have a pleasant dinner party. Mrs. Ballard of Memphis is here also. Col. and Mrs. Johnson expect to spend the evening here.
July 12, 1864.
        I feel quite anxious to get on. Everything is so high, I don't like to stay with any one. Mrs. Balfour is very kind, but I am a stranger. Hope we will leave Thursday. Georgie
is quite a favorite. Oh! I do suffer so much, to be among strangers and without friends or funds. Oh! it is very trying. Col. Balfour is very kind, begs me to make his house my home. I wait until the battle is over. Mally came today, they are all trying to persuade me to stay, but I cannot make up my mind. We have no means, but I will try and manage some way. Mally will not go.
July 13, 1864.
        Passed a sleepless night trying to decide. I finally consented to go to Mr. Battle and leave my diamond ring and get the money. I went and never was I so overcome. I had no control of my feelings. He refused to take the ring, so we all decided to go. Got $860, $300 in interest bearing notes, Oh! could my dear mother and brother know what a trying position I have been in, how miserable they would be. Everything here is so high. Spent the day with Mally and Mrs. Conley, Mrs. Conley and Mally spent the evening with us. I feel sorry for Mallie as I know she will feel lonely when I leave.
July 14, 1864.
        All ready to go to Montgomery, Col. Balfour goes with us. Georgie is delighted and says we are going to see grandma, and I do indeed feel happy to think that we have at least started. It is hard to part with such kind friends, but the hope of seeing
my loved mother and family keeps me in good spirits. Phil seems so cheerful to think he can take me with him--poor fellow! it is a hard thing for him to be in want of money at the time he most needs it, when he has always had what he wanted before. Mallie seems quite sad at parting. We went to the depot in the Colonel's carriage, had a very pleasant trip, arrived at Montgomery about 3 o'clock. We were kindly received by Capt. and Mrs. Cummings, old friends of Phil's. We will remain with them until tomorrow evening when we take the cars for Mobile.
Montgomery.
Friday, July 15, 1864.
        Feel very badly, did not sleep much, mosquitoes so bad. I really am afraid I cannot stand the trip if I travel all day and sleep none at night. Went this morning to ride, went to the cemetery and saw little Georgie Balfour's tomb. The inscription was two verses of the little hymn "I Want to be an Angel," the same my own sweet Georgie often repeats. I thought Oh, shall he too sleep in an unknown tomb in a strange land and among strange people. Little Georgie Balfour was the son of our kind friends and died in Montgomery with dyptheria as they were moving from Mississippi to Tuskegee as refugees. My own little boy reminded them so much of their lost one.


I feel better since I rode out.
        I was quite encouraged about getting through to Memphis but hear now that the Yankees are advancing 10,000 strong upon Jackson, Mississippi. We met our old friend, Mr. Wright at Capt. Cummings'. Capt. Cummings gave us a letter to his father near Hernando. I hope we will get through. Got on the cars at four. They were crowded but about 10 o'clock we got an extra seat and Georgie had a nice bed. He slept very comfortably all night, He is the best child I ever knew for traveling. Col. Balfour is a very agreeable traveling companion. He begs me to consider his home my home while I am in the South and wishes me to go back immediately if we cannot go on. Oh! I pray God I can. I am so anxious to go home.
Saturday, July 16, 1864.
        Took a boat this morning for Mobile. I feel tired and sore, slept uncomfortably in the cars. It has been intensely hot, but it seems more pleasant today. I arrive in Mobile about 9 o'clock, feel very unwell, too tired to sleep. Phil brings me an ice julep and some grapes. Slept until half past one. Cousin John Jones and Col. Marce call. Cross the bay, the boat is crowded. Hattie very pleased to see us. After tea walk out on the pier. It is a beautiful night, and the breeze delightful--it could not be more pleasant anywhere.
It seems quite like old times, tunes of peace, dancing and music. I retire quite early. In all this gaiety my heart is heavy, I long to see my dear Mother. Oh! that I was prepared for heaven, how gladly would I welcome the call of my Saviour! But I pray for patience and strength to bear my trials. Oh! the sorrow of a heart that sorrows all alone. Why is it that those we most love often cause us the most sorrow and the noblest and best of men allow themselves to be led into evil by those who call themselves friends. But oh! what a blessed hope to know that there is a home for us where we shall know no sorrow if we only hold out in faith. God bless my boy! He is a comfort to me.
Sunday, July 17, 1864.
        A delightful morning. Slept finely last night. Had quite a good breakfast of oysters, etc. Hattie and I went over into the bay to bathe and it was splendid. It reminded me of my visit to "Old Point Comfort." If I had been here all this time I think it would have benefited me much. I took my Georgie in with me, and he was delighted. At dinner the ladies were all dressed very handsomely. It looked little like war. As I write I hear the waves dashing over the beach and the breeze blows in so delightfully I feel as if I were on some northern seashore. I think a few weeks here would benefit me so much. The baths have already done so, I feel stronger. Met Major
and Mrs. Winton Smith. She is an old friend and sweetheart of Brother Robert's and he knows all of my family. It is pleasant to meet old family friends so far from home.
Monday, July 18, 1864.
        Leave Hollywood this morning. The boat is crowded, many persons are going over to spend the day and will return this evening--very pleasant crossing. Col. Balfour, Phil, Col. Marce and Cousin John form our party. My friends, Mrs. Louis Girard died two weeks since across the bay and last night her baby, one month old, died. Capt. Girard came over with us. He has four children living now. Mr. Ford, my old school teacher, under whom I was graduated, called to see me and invited me to go and spend a few days with him. Col. Marce has been exceedingly kind. I have eaten my first figs, have been feasting on them today. Leave at 4 o'clock in the cars.
Meridian.
Tuesday, July 19, 1864.
        Arrived this morning about 4 o'clock A.M. Traveled all night. I parted from our friend Col. Balfour, about 2 o'clock. He was much distressed about the report that Tuskegee was burned. I hope it is not true. Phil went to see Gen. Taylor, finds it impossible to get me a pass through the lines, very
stringent orders to the contrary. But I will trust to my wits to get through. It is not near so warm as I had expected. The weather has not been at all oppressive. The fare is plentiful but badly cooked. Just beside me on the porch is a soldier, one of the 3rd. Kentucky. He was in Paducah with Forrest. We expect to leave in the morning. Major Ellis called to see us, looks well. As I write, some Yankee prisoners pass, taken at Jackson, Mississippi.
Wednesday, July 20, 1864.
        Leave Meridian after paying $45 for one day and breakfast and nothing fit for use or to eat. Paid $7 for one doz pieces of cloth. As the Yankees were being brought into these cars to be taken to Jackson for exchange, little Georgie asks "Oh! Mama, is Sergeant George that used to drive our carriage with them? Don't you remember him, Mama?" We meet Capt. George Moorman who is now a Colonel. Meet some young ladies returning from school, Miss Helen Shackleford, she knew Hebe and Lilly at Patapsco, and she seemed very much attached to them. We bought a lunch basket from some Indians. Arrived at the depot for Jackson at 4, paid $6 to bring us a mile and $6.50 for the trunk, $13.00 for one mile! We found the hotel very comfortable and met a gentlemen who lives in Hernando, knows Dr. Temple very well, thinks I will have no difficulty in getting through.


        Went to see Mrs. Dudley, find her a very nice lady. She invited us to go and spend a few days with her. Her servants have gone and her daughters are doing the work. They are very nice people. Took dinner with Gen. Adams and staff. Had a very nice one. Mrs. Dr. Nap called to see me this evening and invited us to take tea tomorrow evening.
Friday, July 22, 1864.
        Will go this morning to Mrs. Dudley's. Are invited to Dr. Nap's to tea. Col. and Miss Duncan called this morning. We take tea there tomorrow evening. Find Mrs. Dudley's a pleasant place to stay, met several ladies, among them is one member of my church.
Saturday, July 23, 1864.
        Spent a very pleasant evening with the Naps. They wish us to spend Monday evening but I declined. They seemed delighted with Phil's singing. There is great rejoicing over the reported victory at Hood and the death of Gen. Grant. Everyone is sorry that Johnston is superseded. Mrs. Anderson and Mrs. Drake of Vicksburg call.
Sunday, July 24, 1864.
        Went to the Christian Church today, first time I have had the pleasure of attending that church since I left home. Mr.
Smythe preached. He called yesterday to see me. There is a report of another Yankee raid. I am uneasy and hope soon to get off.
Monday, July 25, 1864.
        Great excitement! the Yankees are expected. Phil is fortunate enough to get a pass to Penola. Will not wait for the cars but take a hack and meet them at Canton. It is quite singular I left Tuskegee in just the right time. Well, I hope to get away from Jackson before the railroad is destroyed. Phil dines with Col. Yerger.
Tuesday, July 26, 1864.
        All anxiety to get a hack and finally got one for $50, don't get off until 1 o'clock. Leave Mrs. Dudley's--Georgie, Phil and I. Have a very pleasant ride. Reach Canton at sundown and stay at Mrs. Reeves', a private boarding house, meet Whit Thomas. Mrs. Tench calls on us, quite a pretty woman.
Wednesday, July 27, 1864.
        Spent a disagreeable night, felt badly all day. Capt. Leake and Major Triplett will go to Memphis. Arrived at Grenada about 4 o'clock. Expect to take the cars for Penola tomorrow. Oh! it is terrible, the destruction of the cars and locomotives all along the road. Car after car and locomotives after locomotives burnt and charred.


Thursday, July 28, 1864.
        My dear husband goes with me. We had a pleasant trip until we changed cars for the horsecars three miles this side of Penola. We crossed the Tallahatchie River and came to Senatobia on the horsecar. It was very uncomfortable traveling, the car only a rough concern for temporary use. After arriving at Senatobia we walked some distance before we came to a house for boarders. I was warm and tired and so was Georgie. I took a bath and felt better. Oh! this is the last night I am to spend with my husband. My God! When will this cruel war cease?
Friday, July 29, 1864.
        Hurried up to be ready for Capt. Leake. He has kindly offered to take charge of me to Paducah. Am all ready for the hack. Oh! my dear husband, how can I bid you "Goodbye" perhaps for the last time. Sorrow, sorrow, the world is full of trouble. How hard to tear myself away. God bless you, my Darling, God bless you! It is all over--I have left him, every hour separates us farther and farther. I am left alone with my boy. I have not even the satisfaction to know I will soon meet my dear Mother, for months have elapsed since I heard and what may not have happened in that time. Oh! my Mother, God spare you to me. I come to devote my life to my God, my Mother, and my child. What is life but a scene of sorrow and strife! We stop on our way an hour at Dr. Temple's.


They are disappointed we are not going to spend a few days. I regret I cannot. Stay tonight at a Mr. Boyd's. Just here I see a piece written by my dear husband just before we parted. He, too, is filled with sad forebodings. I thank Thee, oh my God, that he does not know how they have been realized. I suppose from what I hear that I have been[.]
        [Note written in diary by Philip Hugh Wallace]
Grenada, Mississippi.
July 27, 1864.
        After nearly three years of bitter and cruel separation, my darling wife, on tomorrow we must separate again, you to a life of loneliness and privation and I to one of danger and sorrow. God only can know, Dearest, how in the long and cruel time of our separation I longed for your loving embrace and sympathy, and how, since our unhoped for reunion, I have dreaded this sad hour; the dread of which has come darkly and remorselessly between every pleasure which I hoped to share with you. Any my dear, bright, noble boy! Must he go too when I perhaps may never behold his dear form again? And the time may come when my name may not recall one single remembrance of his father. And yet, darling, as cruel as it is, I humbly thank our merciful God that he has once more permitted me to gather you both to my heart, even but to tear you from me again,
and more than all, that he has left me the sweet hope that alter our faith has been tried and purified He will again in his own good time bring us together never more to part. When we least expected He brought us together from distant parts of the earth and why may it not be so again?
        You have often said that God has brought our present calamities on us because we did not properly appreciate our past happiness. How fully do I feel at this sad hour how little I know or appreciated my own, as you and my dear boy are leaving me to go far into the dim uncertainties of the future, peopled with enough of known misery and sorrow to fill me with dread, and Oh! of how much that is left me to imagine! There is but one thing left us and that is trust in God's providence which has done so much for us, and the hope that it may not desert us in the future. You have sometimes said you wished, when unavoidable troubles came upon us, that you had not come to me. Should it chance that we are forever separated in this life, every day and hour of the past few months and every spot visited by us will be fraught with the deepest interest and the recollection of it grow brighter and dearer through life. You will always recur to this dear visit as the greatest spot in your memory and in future years how we shall both delight to talk with our dear boy until he almost imagines he recollects each circumstance and place. No, Darling, let to continue to woo the sweet presence of Hope
to remain with us and whilst separated, live over the pleasures of the dead past, blotting from our memory its dark spots and looking only on its bright ones. God never made us perfect, then why expect impossibilities and repine when we have had and still have so such to make us happy. "And, behold a new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another." Through the coming time of our separation your image and our dear boy's shall be ever with me, sleeping or waking, in sickness, in health, in quiet or in danger, to bless and cheer me and not recalled in order to bring to mind some unpleasant reminiscence of the past. I pray God it may be so with you. Each succeeding year robs us of some loved friend or some cherished hope. Let us then cling the closer together and build new hopes on the ruins of the fallen. When I am far away and something recalls my foibles and my faults, remember that in spite of them, my heart was true to you; that I have but one wife and one darling boy to whom my heart clings as its anchor and to whom it will continue to cling while I live.
        stripped of all I possess. Well, be it so. There is one who will give me a home "not prepared with hands" if I hold out faithful and I defy them to rob me of that.
Saturday, July 30, 1864.
        Rested badly, was eaten by the fleas, start again this morning, find some trouble in getting a carriage to take us through the lines. Get a spring wagon, expect to be stopped by the pickets, as they are allowing no one to pass without a pass.
        Have reached Memphis, had no trouble with the pickets. Went to Capt. Leake's office and waited until he sent for Mr. Hatchett. We are all covered with dust, tired and worn out. Capt. Leake has been exceedingly kind. Came to Mr. Hatchett's about 1 o'clock find his wife a nice lady. But Oh! my heart is so heavy as I hear such unfavorable news from Paducah. My friends are all being so tyrannized over.
Sunday, July 31, 1864.
        Feel tired--company for dinner--go to church at night and hear a good sermon. Oh! God! may I profit by its teachings.