May 1, 1864.
        Arrived at Montgomery, Alabama, at 10 o'clock this morning. Bishop Wilmer expects to confirm many persons today and parts with us after a very pretty and appropriate prayer for our welfare. Had a very pleasant religious conversation with him. We all got ready to go to Church and hear the Bishop, but it rained so hard it prevented our going, much disappointed. We have all concluded to go back to Mobile on a pleasure trip. We wish only to be with our husbands, so it will be quite as pleasant on the boat as in the hotel by the kind permission of the Captain. His wife will go also and Mrs. Gen. Armstrong. How I regret passing another Lord's Day without attending Church. This afternoon Mrs. Harris and Mrs. Armstrong came on board, very pleasant and pretty ladies. Mrs. Armstrong is an old acquaintance of Phil's.
May 2, 1864.
        This is Mally's birthday. We have been at Selma, Alabama, all day, went in town and visited the Arsenal and were very much interested; went all through and saw them making all kinds


of ammunition, was surprised to find machinery brought to such perfection. Went to a music store, bought a book "Macaria," by the author of "Beulah." The captain had the piano tuned and we hope to have some music. It is now 6:30 in the afternoon, and we are just leaving Selma. It is cool this afternoon. I am surprised to see Captain Fuller, and I write by him to Cousin John. We had some music tonight but not so good as usual, too cool to sit on deck.
May 3, 1864.
        Passed the day as usual, talking, reading and sleeping. After tea Mr. Davis sang some pretty songs. He sings well.
May 4, 1864.
        A beautiful day, expect to reach Mobile by 11 o'clock. Have to take rooms on the third story of the "Battle House," meet my friends and relatives and Gen. Clark at the dinner table. Afternoon we go on the horsecars to see Mrs. Lay and much to our surprise meet Mrs. Jones, really Mrs. Miker, the same person we met in Nashville, Tennessee, quite an eccentric character. Mrs. Harris and Mrs. Armstrong call for us to go to a fair, but we can not leave the children.
May 5, 1864.
        Go to see Mrs. Brown. Quite warm, have a headache. I meet Mrs. Hislip, the authoress. We bid Mrs. Harris and Mrs.
Armstrong goodbye and go to the boat at 3 o'clock. We regret to leave them as they are very pleasant ladies. We leave Mobile about 5 o'clock, I have at severe headache and retire early.
May 6, 1864.
        Nothing of interest. How high everything is! $30.00 for doing up a muslin dress, $20.00 for a waist. I forgot to mention that Bishop Wilmer confirmed Gen. Pillow on the first of May.
May 7, 1864.
        Phil had a chill last night, looks badly. Oh I have such a heaviness of heart and feel so oppressed today. Oh God! have mercy on me and those dear to me. Lord! Thou knowest my heart. Oh! my dear Mother, have you heard from me? I pray you are well and happy. The Captain had some nice strawberries for us, and beautiful flowers have been sent to gladden our eyes, all nature is gloriously beautiful today, but my heart is heavy. I long to see my dear Mother and my other dear ones. If I could only be with my husband, but his leave of absence is nearly out and then I shall be alone. We are now at Selma, Alabama, and will remain until 5 o'clock. I met Cousin John Jones, Mr. Lawson, and Johnny Flournoy. Mr. Lawson seemed almost overcome with joy on seeing us. He
offered all the assistance he could, gave us a hearty Kentucky grip, and share of his money and necessities. Cousin John had been waiting to see us for a day. Mrs. Dr. [blank] formerly of Shelbyville, got on board, a very intelligent woman, a great talker. Went on deck as usual and sang for the Captain, but I have felt depressed all day and am anxious to hear from home.
May 8, 1864.
        Arrive at Montgomery and go to "Hotel Montgomery Hall," take breakfast--very good--and go to the Episcopal Church, hear an excellent sermon and a prayer for the President of the Confederate States. Oh! how strange it sounded after hearing the prayer for the President of the United States so long. A beautiful prayer for the success of our Cause, the suffering prisoners, wounded, orphans, and widows, and thanks for our recent victory in Virginia. How beautifully he spoke. Though the air trembled with the news of another great victory, the sound brought anguish and desolation to many hearts. Our friend, Bishop Wilmer, was there. I hope there may be much good done in the army. I hear there is a great change for the better, and I pray God it may continue. After tea I met Dr. and Mrs. Knoch and Dr. and Mrs. Bridges. Did not go to Church, headache.


May 9, 1864.
        Bright and beautiful day. I have just eaten some strawberries--very nice. Oh! dear Ma, what would I not give to see or to hear from you. God grant you may be well! Col. and Mrs. Short and Mrs. Goodloe called to see us this morning, passed a very pleasant morning, am invited to Capt. Cummings, but think I will not go. Take a long walk in the evening--some beautiful places. After tea Major McClure called--nice gentleman, an old schoolmate of Phil's. Great excitement here at the news of the repulse of the enemy. How high everything is here--board $20. $50. for Phil, Georgie, and myself.
May 10, 1864.
        Walked out in the city--nothing new. Major Dr. Driver, who met Nannie and Bertie at Caroline Garrett's in Paducah, when he was a prisoner two years ago, is now in Montgomery. He asked about the children.
May 11, 1864.
        We left Montgomery at 8 this morning to take the cars for Tuskegee. Mr. Davis went as far as Chehaw with us. Georgie quite distressed at parting with Pappy as he calls him--indeed we shall miss him very much. We meet with some very disagreeable people in the cars and stage. Don't think Kentuckians have much patience with Southerners. Took the stage at the
station and go five miles to reach Tuskegee--very cold disagreeable day--sent our cards to Mrs. Cosby and Byers.
May 12, 1864.
        Ladies have not called, quite cold today. Had a fine dinner, turkey, green peas, lettuce, sweet potatoes, sallad, etc, fare very good here. Walked out this evening--some very beautiful places. Phil will go to serenade some friends tonight.
May 13, 1864.
        We went early this morning to call on Mrs. Byers. Mrs. Cosby and Emma Byers had gone to attend Dr. Johnson's wedding. Mrs. Byers gave us a pressing invitation to take tea and spend the evening with her but we declined. I wrote to Cousin John Jones today. This evening we walked out again. This is really a beautiful place, some beautiful yards. Strawberries are now plentiful. For dinner we had quite a variety of vegetables. Nothing like starvation here. There is nothing here that reminds us of the war, except the anxious hearts of Mothers and friends and the conversation of the gentlemen. Everything is quite, indeed all that is beautiful to the eye can be seen here; the place seems laden with flowers and the perfume of flowers. As I write, a child passed with a handful of the largest roses I have ever seen and magnolia blossoms.


It seems strange that those who live in such a beautiful country can be at war with one another. Near us is the Church where they have the Union prayermeetings to pray for our army. God grant us peace! 'Tis such a calm beautiful evening, all so quiet. I an writing in the balcony of the hotel. Many persons have passed, mostly schoolgirls and young ladies. I see no scarcity of dress materials--all look neat. It is almost dark, occasionally I hear a footstep but in this quiet there is heard all around the sweetest sounds from the mocking birds. I never experienced so perfect a calm and this is quite a large place--all sounds seemed hushed except that of the birds. Truly this is one of God's loveliest spots. It is a fit place to worship our God for all around seems quiet and loveliness.
May 14, 1864.
        Nothing new, such a heavy rain. Georgie and Eddie gone into the country for strawberries.
May 15, 1864.
        A beautiful day. News that there is fighting at Dalton. Go to Church where prayers are offered for our success. As we return from Church the stage came in and Gus Given was in it. How delighted we were to meet. He said, "I would have followed you over the Confederacy but I would have found


You."


May 16, 1864.
        Cool and pleasant today. We are invited to take tea with Captain Conley.
Tuskegee, Alabama.
May 17, 1864.
        We went about 8:30 to Captain Conley's. Much to my surprise ladies dressed in evening costume came in, some extravagantly dressed, and many glittered in their diamonds. The Mrs. Balfours looked quite Parisian in their style. Miss Dargin, the senator's daughter, was decidedly an elegant girl; very intellectual and played finely on the piano. The young people danced and Mally, Phil and I sang, Phil's music created quite a sensation. Mrs. Conley was very polite in her attentions. At 1 o'clock we walked into supper and to our surprise was a most beautiful table, the center ornamented with a pyramid of flowers in a silver stand, five stands in height and tastefully arranged; the cake was beautifully iced, three varieties, fruit, teacake and pound, calf's foot jelly, turkey, chicken salad, ham, delicious tea, contents of the table; and this is the starvation in the South! Nowhere in the South could you find more style, perhaps a greater variety, but nothing more; for wealth, style, beauty and taste no place can surpass it, and this in the house of a refugee from Mississippi who claims to be only camping, having collected
what little furniture she could find for temporary use. If this be a poor dying struggle, Oh! beautiful South, you are glamorous even in your death. We returned about 2 o'clock. Most of the company there were refugees from different states; Dr. Withers and his interesting daughter from Kentucky. Gus Givens left us at 10 o'clock, took stage and has gone to Savannah. Captain Cummings sent us a bowl of fine strawberries with sugar, cake and cream to eat with them. We prepared them and then had quite a little party to eat them in the parlor. Walked out to look at a house.
May 18, l864.
        When the stage arrived "Blind Tom" was on it. He is certainly one of the greatest wonders of the day, indeed the greatest. His memory is wonderful, his powers for imitating equally so and his musical talent surpasses anything I ever heard or dreamed of. We went to his concert tonight. He played the most difficult pieces, composed and arranged beautifully. His imitation of "Old Uncle Charlie of Kentucky" was very good, and he repeated word for word as he heard Uncle Charlie speak. His piece called "Manassas Battle," his conception of a battle from hearing the newspapers read, was splendid. Has imitations playing of the organ, guitar, banjo and violin, etc. After we returned home he came into our part of the hotel and we sang for him and he seemed pleased.


Most of the time when he heard no music he was turning around like a top, a very singular person.
May 19, 1864.
        We are invited this morning to Mrs. Conley's and have to accept as we declined last evening. We are sorry we cannot hear "Blind Tom" again. Cousin Ed left this morning. I spent a pleasant afternoon with Mally and Phil in the parlor and several gentlemen came in[.]
May 20, 1864.
        Phil left this morning in the stage for Montgomery. Dr. Johnston invited us to take tea at his house this evening, have to decline as the gentlemen are absent. Feel very lonely. Mally and I retire early.
May 21, 1864.
        Mrs. Beatty and Mrs. Conley call to take us to the "Picnic" six miles in the country, have a very pleasant time. Meet the Mrs. Johnsons, Mrs. Conley, Mrs. Judson and several other ladies. Have a fine dinner, good fish, hot coffee, turkey, chicken salad, ham, partridge, fruit cake, pound cake, wafers, biscuit and crackers. All wished so much for
Phil. Returned home in the evening. Heard that Mrs. Byers had given a large party the evening before. We were not honored with an invitation.
May 22, 1864.
        Another beautiful Sabbath--Glory be to God on high, peace goodwill towards all men. Mally, the children, and I go to the Presbyterian Church this morning, in the afternoon to the Baptist Church for prayer meeting, where we heard the most earnest prayers offered in behalf of our country. I took a walk retired early.
May 23, 1864.
        Arise earlier than usual, busy all day cutting out shirts and some clothing for Georgie. Mally and I went to prayer meeting. There seems to be doubt and gloom hanging over the inhabitants of this town; the war news is not so favorable. Oh! God have mercy on us! My persons have lost sons and brothers and the wails of sorrow can be heard through the town. After we returned from church, we found Mrs. Johnston's carriage waiting for us. We had quite a pleasant ride. Tuskegee is a beautiful little place. All seemed gloomy at the tea table. I look for Phil tomorrow.
May 24, 1864.
        Phil came in the stage. Quite a storm this evening.
Received an invitation to a picnic but declined it. There seems to be doubt and gloom with the people as to the result of the impending battles. They have been too sanguine.
May 25, 1864.
        Phil had a chill last night. It is quite cool this morning. Wrote yesterday to Lucy Johnson and India Browne. Mrs. Beatty called this evening, we went to prayer meeting. When we returned we found Mrs. Balfour had called and was waiting in her carriage with Mrs. Holloway to take us riding. We had a very pleasant ride. George is not well this morning. Phil received a dispatch saying he had been elected Captain of Company "I" in Scott's Brigade, Louisiana.
May 26, 1864.
        I called this evening to see how Mrs. Conley was and found her looking quite badly.
May 27, 1864.
        Called on Mrs. Conley, Mrs. Beatty and Mrs. (Dr.) Johnson. Went to prayer meeting this evening, received a letter from Henry Jones. He wishes his cousin to accompany us home.
May 28, 1864.
        Phil had another chill last night.
May 29, 1864.
        Mally, Phil and I went to church this morning. Phil


looked very feeble.
May 30, 1864.
        Went to prayer meeting--very interesting. General and Mrs. Higgins called, invited out to take tea with Mrs. Conley and meet Mrs. General Humphries. She is a very intelligent woman.
May 31, 1864.
        Phil has gone to Montgomery. I have written a note to General Crosby to excuse the address of my letters to his care. Wrote to Lucy Johnson and Lou Maxwell.