June 1, 1864.
        I called this evening to see Mrs. Col. Balfour and Mrs. Holloway, Mrs. Balfour sent us home in her carriage. I found Mrs. Conley here, walked home with her.
June 2, 1864.
        Received a note from Phil. Mrs. Leroy called. Wishes Phil to sing in a concert for the benefit of refugees from home. We called to see Mrs. Gen. Higgins and Miss Foster.
June 3, 1864.
        Disappointed, Phil did not return. No letters. Mrs. Hawkins, and her husband and little child came today. She
is an interesting lady and has been superintendent of three hospitals in Richmond. Has been a liberal donator to the Cause. They seem quite wealthy. She knows Mrs. Gwathmey, of Richmond, who is also a hospital angel. Mrs. Boykin called to beg us to assist in a concert given for the refugees.
June 5, 1864.
        Went to church this morning. Prayer meeting this evening.
June 6, 1864.
        Look for Phil.
June 7, 1864.
        Received a letter from Phil. Col. Short had not arrived. He will not for a day or two longer. Called on Mrs. Boykin[.] She is still persistent in her persuasion for us to sing at the concert. I think we shall go to Mrs. Battle's this evening and meet those who take part in the performance and give our decisive answer. Sorry to disappoint them as they seem to depend so much on us. Dear little Georgie has seemed lowspirited about his grandma all day and begs to go back to see her. Dear Boy, his mother feels too that she cannot be parted from her much longer.


June 8, 1864.
        I wrote to Phil. Have been often interrupted. Mrs. Battle called--a charming women. Mrs. Adams sent a basket of flowers and fruits to us, beautifully arranged. Went to Mrs. Conley's and spent a very pleasant day, very nice dinner. Phil came home much to our surprise. We walked home with Mrs. Humphries, quite late. Mrs. Boykin had us to spend the evening with her. Met Dr. and Mrs. Johnson, Mr. and Mrs. Battle. The table looked beautiful. We had pound cake, teacakes, chicken salad, custard, peaches and cream, broiled chicken, biscuit, cakes and wafers, and after tea went to Mrs. Battle's to practice for the concert. Spent a very pleasant evening. Returned by 12, found Georgie suffering very much from sun having burned his neck, poor little fellow.
June 9, 1864.
        Rise late this morning, slept badly last night. Phil, Col. Bits and I went over to Mrs. Battle's to practice. They are very anxious for me to take part, I assist them to arrange and learn their pieces. Mrs. Battle gave me a cup of coffee. I have never met a more agreeable and intelligent couple than Mr. and Mrs. Battle. We meet tonight at the Baptist College to practice.
June 10, 1864.
        The concert went off very well. Phil was very much


complimented indeed. Mrs. Conley went with us. Mrs. Stamp, whose husband was killed at Gettisburg (who was a nephew of Jeff Davis) called in my room and dressed Mrs. Conley's hair. Mrs. Stamp is a beautiful woman. We received $340. from our concert for our sick and wounded at Camp Watts.
June 11, 1864.
        Calls again this morning. Col. Balfour called to invite us to take tea with them. We have been treated with every attention by the Tuskegee people. Spent a pleasant [hour] with Mrs. Balfour, met Mrs. Humphrey, Mrs. Holloway, [and] young Mrs. Balfour, who is a beauty. Mrs. Conley went with us. It rained very hard about 12 and Col. Balfour sent his carriage for us. Heard that the Federals had issued a proclamation prohibiting persons from returning north within the Federal lines. Oh! how terrible if I am not permitted to go to my dear mother. I feel that I would go crazy. God grant that I may be permitted to see her dear face again!
June 12, 1864.
        This is the 29th anniversary of my birthday. One year ago I was in Paducah keeping house. I was with my dear mother but separated from my husband. Now I am in Tuskegee, Alabama, with my dear husband beside me, [separated] from my own blessed mother. It has been raining all day and tonight it is pouring down. It is not a bright day; but if I could only hear from
my mother, I would be more than happy. Oh! my God, bless and watch over her and spare our lives that we may meet again if it be Thy will. My husband has been with me all day. He seems loath to leave me even for a moment. He is so kind and affectionate. Our little boy stands beside us. He has just asked "I wonder where the moon is? Oh!, he says, "I know. It is behind the clouds." He is very bright. He said this morning, "Oh! Mama, you ought not to take me from my grandma. Don't you know it will make her sick if I don't stay with her." Into Thy merciful hands, Oh! God, do I commit my loved ones! And you, my dear brother, who are in prison, may God bless and comfort you!


[Note: The following notation in the diary is by Philip Wallace]
        My dear wife has just finished jotting down the anniversary of her birthday, the last of three that she has passed with me. God only knows how sadly the long weary years have passed since I have spent one with her, and how grateful I am that he has permitted her to be with me again and my dear boy also. This time three years ago he was an infant, and now when I look on his well grown form, his beautiful face and hear his sweet prattle, I can only pray that many succeeding anniversaries may find us united as now.
June 15, 1864.
        Mrs. Conley, Mally and I went to Mrs. Humphries' to attend Episcopal services. Very few were there. Mrs. Byers, Mrs. Cosby were among the few. Mrs. Cosby did not speak and looked fidgity. Dr. Hodges was a pleasant speaker. He brought me a letter from Lou Maxwell. In the evening Mrs. Balfour and Mrs. Holloway called. Spent a very pleasant evening.
June 16, 1864.
        I spent a very uncomfortable night. Suffered very much from some eruption.
June 17, 1864.
        A very rainy disagreeable day. Phil received a note from Mrs. Conley inviting him and his friends who serenaded with him last night to accompany him to take tea with her. He declined as he did not wish to have her take the trouble of an entertainment because he had given her a serenade. She and some other friends who had been very attentive to us and who were very fond of music he serenaded last night. At Mrs. Johnson's they had a fine supper set for them, hot coffee, biscuit, salad, custard, cake, etc. All day it has been raining. I made two pincushions that we have very much needed out of the gaskets of the cannon that we got at Selma, Alabama.
Mrs. Judge Hopkins, who has been superintending the affairs of the hospital at Camp Watts, returned just now. She has been in the rain. Four ladies go down every day from this place to nurse and carry edibles for the sick and wounded. Tuskegee has been thrown in a state of excitement for several days past by the escape of two women out of jail. One, Mrs. Keelan, is a famous negro thief and I believe a very desperate character. They pursued and finally caught her, she is now in the cage. She wrote at one time to Gen. Sherman, enclosed the letter in a book and directed it to some northern friends, the contents of the letter to this effect, writing Sherman to come to this place that he would find a rich harvest. The letter did not reach its destination but fell into other hands. The people seem quite glad that she has been caught. We have heard nothing from Col. Short. Phil has become impatient. He has accepted a captaincy of a company in Scott's Brigade, East Louisiana.
June 18, 1864.
        We were all thrown in quite a state of excitement by the confusion caused by our landlord getting into a spree. He was in a dreadful way, breaking up china, etc. and illtreating his wife. We are anxious to get away and regret the incident as we have been pleasantly situated but as these freaks are becoming quite frequent we will soon leave. It is still raining,


fear too much for the crops. We are invited to take tea at Professor Battle's, brother to Gen. Battle, met Mrs. and Dr. Johnson, Judge and Mrs. Hopkins. We had a fine supper, not to be surpassed in Yankeedom; breads, biscuits, waffles, lightbread, and wafers, broiled chicken, chipped ham, salad, fruit cake, pound cake, custard, whortleberries and cream, plums and fruit of different kinds, tea and coffee. Mr. Kelly, our landlord, has gone away, feel uneasy for fear he will come back on a spree. I hope we shall leave here soon.
Sunday, June 19, 1864.
        Still raining, will not go to church, am still suffering with an eruption something like hives. Oh! my dearest, most beloved mother, how I wish I could be with you this day. I pray God you may be well and happy.
June 20, 1864.
        Still raining. Phil received a letter today from Mr. Kelly saying our board would be increased to $250 for Georgie and I. We received a letter from Mike Nelson. Spent a restless night, bad dreams.
June 21, 1864.
        Bright morning. Phil went to Montgomery. Col. Martin lent us 400$ did not wish to keep our gold but Phil insisted. Rain again in the evening, don't feel very well.
June 22, 1864.
        A bright day much to our delight and surprise. Phil did not return as expected. Went to prayermeeting, after to see Mrs. Reed who we found to be a very agreeable and sensible woman, quite a character. Mrs. and Professor Battle called after tea. Saw Mrs. Wright--don't admire her. Georgie brought me some peaches from Mrs. Reed's. Phil received a note from the president of the Methodist Female College requesting him to sing in the choir next Sunday. There is a sermon to be delivered in the Commencement--a great day with the girls.
June 23, 1864.
        Called on some ladies this morning, found some very entertaining, returned. Dr. Johnson called and gave me another prescription for my hives. It is a very annoying disease. Phil returned, could not get the money yet. I feel so worried about it. I fear to be in the power of such a man as Mr. Kelly. I am really afraid of him. Went to prayer meeting, Mally received a letter from Hattie Jones. She writes that Cousin John has a letter to me from home. Dear, dear home and you, my dear Mother! How I long to see your dear face. My Georgie asks me so often why I don't go to see dear Grandma and says "Ma, you ought not to leave my dear grandma." I have felt almost heartsick today. I feel so anxious to hear from and see them all in Paducah.


June 24, 1864.
        Called on some ladies. In the evening went to see Mrs. Nall, the Presbyterian minister's wife and had a very unpleasant walk, very rugged steep hills to climb. I stepped into a spring, it was a trap set by some boys, it looked like a firm, good stepping stone. I put my foot on it and fell through, it being only a thin crust with a little sand thrown on it. Found Mrs. Nall a very agreeable person. Had a severe headache after my return.
June 25, 1864.
        Very hot day. Georgie and Eddie are invited to Mrs. Gen. Humphries' to a party this evening. I feel very unwell don't know whether or not it is from cold, hope soon to be relieved. Stage has just returned from the depot, hope it brings news and letters for us. Had ripe peaches this morning. It is very rainy, fear we shall suffer with heat.
Sunday, June 26, 1864.
        I will not go to church, too warm. Lie in bed most of the day don't feel well. In the evening Major McClure from Montgomery called. He is Paymaster, no money in the department.
June 27, 1864.
        No news. Went in the evening to see Mrs. Conly. She looks very badly. She lost her brother, died in the hospital. Have heard of one of my cousins, "Uncle Allan's" son, I believe, being badly wounded in the hospital in Atlanta. Have met Gen.
Battle several times--he is a very pleasant gentleman. Mally expects to go to see her husband tomorrow. Hope I will hear from Hattie Jones and get my letters from home.
June 29, 1864.
        Mally left for Atlanta this morning, hopes to meet Cousin Ed. Phil went as far as Chehaw in the stage with Her. Received a letter from the front from Mike Nelson. Have been much amused at a conversation between Georgie and a little friend, Julia. She is enumerating her brothers and sisters. He claims to have as many as she, naming Sister Fanny, doctor, etc. She mentions her brother Charlie, Georgie says, "Mrs. Richie has a Charlie for me," a very amusing child. Went to see Mrs. Johnson and Mrs. Beattie found them absent. At Mrs. Beattie's a dog flew out and barked at us, I was very alarmed. When we returned Mrs. Conley called us in and we had to spend the evening, I feel quite nervous.
June 30, 1864.
        Feel badly, have been in bed all day. Georgie fell out of bed and with my other fright made me so nervous I could not sleep. Dr. called this evening. Undressed this evening. Hope to be well tomorrow. I received a letter today from home from Brother Robert dated April 6th, tears of joy I shed. Oh! that I could have one of more recent date. I thank God for this one.