Paducah, Kentucky. Steam Boat Imperial.
March 19, 1864.
        "Is it possible we have at last 'at least' started on our long expected trip to "Dixie Land?" I can scarcely realize it is so. Mally and I have been persevering through many difficulties to gain our end, and have faced oppositions and gained our point. All of our friends urged us not to attempt such a hazardous trip, thought it impossible to pass the lines.
        We first purchased a wagon and mules and fitted out for a trip through Tennessee, going to Florence, by boat, thence to Dalton, by land; but Mally could not go that way so we gave it up. Many and sore were our disappointments, but we persevered and here we are, and I hope soon to be rewarded for our trouble in the great pleasure of being with our husbands.
        Here on the boat we meet Mrs. General Bowen. She is going South also; very pleasant to meet with her. Captain a Union man.
March 21, 1864.
        Are at Nashville, Tennessee. Mr. Hillman goes with us to Headquarters. We went in to General Rousseau who said he would use his influence with General Sherman who was then absent. We then went to General S's Headquarters and saw General Webster, and he promised us aid, but said that the
General would be absent some days. We then went back to the boat where we remained all night.
March 22, 1864.
        We go again with Mrs. Craig, who was very kind to try and get a room but found it impossible; the city was crowded to overflowing, the streets blocked with wagons and soldiers, find it impossible to get a room, return to the boat. In the afternoon Mr. Budderic, an old acquaintance, called and invited us to his house. Mrs. Bowen goes to Captain Plummer's-- an old army acquaintance. Here we are very comfortable at Mrs. Budderic's--they are very glad to see us. We are introduced to Father Stephens, Chaplain in the army. We have taken our first Dutch supper and retire.
March 23, 1864.
        We find Father Stephens a genius, very intelligent and agreeable, plays finely on the piano, improvises beautifully and seems to take quite a fancy to us, especially Mally.
        Several officers come after tea.
March 25, 1864.
        Meet quite an excentric character--an orphan educated by Father Stephens. He had on a butternut coat which attracted our attention. We get into conversation, and find him a
Vallandingham worshiper, quite a sympathizer with the South. We go down and find Mr. Craig, we hear General Sherman has come and gone--no chance for getting through the lines. Go to see Mrs. Bowen--engage passage on the "Nannie Byers" and leave at two o'clock, Mr. Craig taking us to the boat. We meet Mr. Richê who gives me a note from Mrs. Maxwell who saw Phil a few days before writing.
March 26, 1864.
        Our friends told us if we did not succeed in getting through Nashville to return and be content to remain at home, but we have decided to go to Vicksburg. Shall we let our friends in Paducah know we are there or not? Report that Forrest is in Paducah, don't believe it. Well, it is really true, we find the town burning. What more can disturb our feelings? The boat is not allowed to stop. The gunboats are firing. I see one of my houses burnt to ashes, Mally fears hers is hurt also. But what is the fate of our friends in the town? What success had the Confederates, God bless them!? We arrive at Cairo at 7 o'clock. The captain went to the Quartermaster department--find them burnt. Returned and meet Cousin Coleman Woolfolk, and he takes me at once to his room where Georgie and I stayed all night. I was quite brave.
March 27, 1864.
        Go to the St. Charles for breakfast. Mally, Mrs. Bowen, and Cousin Richard meet us. I then went to Mrs. McCauley and got a room--hot Southerners--very pleased to have us. I suffer very much with a boil in my ear. Mally and I determine to go to Paducah to see our friends--the boat has come, am too sick to go, Molly goes, I am suffering from severe headache from excitement.
March 29, 1864.
        Mally returns, my dear Mother is well. Oh! how thankful I am. She was at Mrs. Boswell's during the fight. Sister Mary & children at home--ball entered the house & exploded near the children's bed. What an escape--all very much frightened--all the houses near the spot struck--much suffering --Sam Thompson killed near his old office--still fearing another raid--if so the Federals will destroy the town. We determined to go to Memphis--have quite an escort to the boat.
March 31, 1864.
        Got on S.B. Belle of St. Louis at 9 o'clock P.M.-- very fine boat--officers all Southern--don't charge us-- very attentive and kind. Met Mr. Hatchet at Memphis--invites Mally & I to his house--his wife is taken sick. We don't go there as she is not well enough to receive company--Go to
Gayoso--find many acquaintances--meet Hattie Jones-- consult as to the route--Meet a Mrs. Shock--very kind. We at last decide on the route through Vixburg.