Monday April 15th 1861
        A dark rainy day. Miss Mary and Mr. M--left this morning. Sister Mary came back this morning, reported Mrs. Wm. Wheeles a great deal better. The boat landed, put off a man that is to work at the quarter. I heard good news, Fort Sumpter has been taken by our men. Rejoice-Rejoice.
Tuesday April 16th 1861
        A pretty day. Finished the 4th volume of the life of Washington, by [Washington] Irving. Brother Wilson's horses had colds this morning. Sister rode down a few moments to see how Mrs. Wm. Wheeles was, found her better. Heard the fort at Pensacola had been reinforced which I regret, though I hope yet to hear it has been captured by our Southern Boys. I wrote to Eva Roper tonight.
Wednesday April 17th 1861
        I began the 5th volume of the life of Washington. It is a lovely day. Brother Wilson went to town, failed to bring back a letter to me. Felt disappointed at least, expected one. He carried our bonnets back to have fixed over as we didn't like them first. They look very well now. Sister Mary & I walked up to the Quarter to see Mrs. Hall. A workman's wife. We rode back in the carriage. He (Brother Wilson) brought the news that Lincoln had issued a proclamation that if the South did not get back into the Union in thirty days, he would force it back, & has ordered out 75,000 men. He has stopped the mail. I hope the border states will join the Confederacy. Good night.
Thursday 18th 1861
        A lovely day. Sister & I sewed on my other muslin dress. Betsy, the servant assisted us yesterday on my other, by hemming my ruffles. Mr. Wheeles & Miss Mary rode up for me to take a ride, but Bro. Wilson had gone to the Quarter, but they went by & he brought the horse down. Very late Miss Mary came back, stated that she left Mr. Wheeles looking for her handsome pin she lost. She & I rode a short distance, then she came back a part of the way [and] met Mr. Wheeles who announced that he had found my black veil I had lost, but not Miss Mary's pin. I'm very sorry that she lost it. On reaching home, found Mrs. Paul & two children (Sallie & Allen) were there. We did not retire until "Hope" [a boat that ferried both people and material] came up & threw off Bro. Wilson, a paper, & also brought the news that Virginia had left the Union, that Tenn. had refused to give the North troops, but had offered men to the Confederacy. Hurrah for Tenn. If she will secede, I will no longer be ashamed of her. We heard the Cannon from Yazoo City firing off over the good news.
Friday April 19th 1861
        Mrs. Paul & children left about 11 or twelve o'clock for Mrs. Wm. Wheeles. Mr. Wm. W--came up and said a little negro boy was lost, belonging to himself. Bro. Wilson let his man Henry help look for him, & after so long a time the boy was found, but rather stiff from riding all night. Mr. Barksdale & his daughter Jennie stopped by a few moments this afternoon. Sister, Dr. Wilson, & myself went walking. It has been a lovely day.
Saturday April 20th 1861
        A lovely day. Sister, Bro. Wilson, & myself went down to Mr. Gales this afternoon. Saw Miss Annie & Dr. Gale, & also a Mrs. Ewing & her son, became acquainted with, he is rather a milk & water kind of being, but she is a very nice lady. Miss Annie gave me some flowers out of her vase, she had put in that morning. As we came by Mrs. Fred Wheeles', Ada ran out & gave me a bouquet & Thalba gave Sister Mary one. Stopped by to see Mrs. W--Wheeles. She was a little better, Miss Mary was not well. Sallie Paul was there, her mother was over at Mrs Brooks.
Sunday April 21st 1861
        A pretty day. Spent most of it reading. Mrs. Paul did not return today, consequently did not come by. Sister is not very well. Mr. Paul & Mr. Barksdale stopped by to talk the war news with Brother Wilson. I did not see them.
Monday April 22nd 1861
        A pleasant day. The river higher than it has been this winter, still rising. Mrs. Paul passed by, I was out at the gate, talked awhile with her. She had to go home, & could not stop by. Received a letter from Brother John, in which he stated he had an increase to his family in the way of a little boy, which he called Thomas Turner Carney. I'm glad, & started to reply to his letter but did not finish it. Sister & I finished my other muslin dress.
Tuesday April 23rd 1861
        A pretty day & have been sewing on sister's dresses. We made quite a pretty flag for Bro. Wilson to wave at the Company, that is to pass down on the boat. Heard that there had been a fight in Baltimore 800 Yankees taken prisoners, with 3,000 stands of arms. Hope came up soon tonight about 15 mi after the charm, threw off a paper which contained little or no news.
Wednesday April 24th 1861
        There is to be a barbecue at Satarshia's, so Mrs. Wheeles sent us word yesterday, but we don't want to go. It rained some last night, though it didn't wet the ground much. I finished the last volume of the life of Washington, by Irving. Began a novel called the discarded daughter, by Mrs. Southworth. Sister's dress is finished.
Thursday April 25th 1861
        The river still rising. We walked this evening. It is a clear day. Mr. Wm. Wheeles up to see Bro. Wilson, (we did not see him) he brought no news. I sewed some crochet trimmings on a skirt I had made, riped a dress of the waist for Sister,& read the rest of the day.
April 26, 1861
        The least little bit of rain. Quite cloudy. Bro. Wilson showed Messrs. Wm. & Fred. Wheeles his flag yesterday, & they thought it quite pretty. I saved my traveling dress on the waist, and finished the Discarded Daughter. Sister, Dr. Wilson, & myself, with henry, four oarsmen went down to see Mrs. Wm. Wheeles. We carried our flag, which floated in the wind, and made the waves quite high. Found Mrs. Wheeles sick in bed. Sister promised to send the skiff for her to take a ride in the morning. I spent the night.
Saturday April 27th 1861
        The weather being so bad, we were disappointed in our ride. On my way home dropped my bundle, & as I was riding alone on horseback had to get down & pick it up, as I had refused to let any one go home with me for fear of troubling some one. After remounting my horse shyed, & on looking saw a very large snake, just going to the field. Got home safe. It soon after poured down rain.
Sunday April 28th 1861
        Sister, Bro. Wilson & myself went up to church at the school house, heard a good sermon from Mr. McCray. We and the Misses Galtney, & their brother Tommy, & Willie Barksdale took dinner with Mrs. Paul. She was looking unusually well. Mr. McCray preached to the colored people, & of course we had to let Henry, our driver, attend. Consequently was a little late getting home. While we were all sitting in the parlor, Mr. Norton, the overseer from the Yandell place called "Joe's Walk" came in the parlor where we were [and] said John had told him to go down to Bro. Wilson's, and see his sweetheart, and as I was up there he came in. Took Bro. Wilson over home with him to see the letter, also said john wrote a much better letter than he expected, and that he wrote also a much longer one. I hope Cousin John only loves me as a cousin, for I think so, so much of him, & wouldn't have him think of me as any thing else but a cousin. Bro. Wilson received a letter from Pa today & he has joined a company for home protection. Was surprised but nevertheless glad, was afraid Pa was still for the Union. He says public opinion has undergone a great change within the past week, & that much excitement prevails. I know from the way he writes & by him being changed, there is an unusual amount of stir & excitement at home. I have been busy all day making wax flowers. Read my chapter & said my prayers, leaving our cause in the Hand that ruleth over all.
Monday 29th 1861
        It has been storming all day, raining, thundering, & lightning. Had a fine mess of strawberries for supper tonight. Feel very tired & sleepy. Have been making wax flowers for sister Mary today. It is still raining.
Tuesday 30th 1861
        Cleared off today. Sister Mary & I went up to spend the day with Mrs. Galtney. Did not find Mrs. Paul, as she had promised. Had anticipated going up in the skiff, but it had gotten away, & we had to go in the carriage. Met a Mrs. Shaw, who was originally from Boston, but for the past 5 or 6 years a resident of Vicksburg. I am anxious to hear the news in the papers, that have just come.