Wednesday May 1st 1861
        I did not see the new paper last night, as I was asleep when Sister Mary brought it to me, consequently read it after breakfast. It stated Tenn. would soon be out of the Union, that Andy Johnson was repeated[ly] insulted enroute for home, & came very near being hung. It is a pity he was not. Was busy moulding wax when Mrs. Fred Wheeles & Mrs. Roberts came up to spend the day. I sewed some on Miss Lucy's silk quilt this evening. This afternoon Miss Sarah Authurs, Miss Mary Whitehead, Lucy Wheeles, & little Fred Wheeles came up & spent the afternoon. When they left Sister Mary & I walked down to the river. It is still rising slowly. By sister's request, she made me get my guitar & try to play some, but my feelings not being in sympathy soon put it aside, for I have a tinge of the blues tonight. Had hoped to have gotten off to Tenn very soon but Bro. Wilson's overseer resigned his place, expecting the company he joined to be ordered off, so it will put off our movement in the direction of home sometime longer, as Bro. Wilson will have to get another overseer in place of Mr. Dickson, & will have to try him then.
Thursday May 2nd 1861
        It rained nearly all day until about dark. Went out to feed the deer, they ate the corn I gave them better than the meal sister took them. They are little beauties.
Friday May 3rd 1861
        Been busy yesterday & today working in wax. The boat failed to put off a paper last night as it passed up. Don't know why. While at dinner heard the drum beating, found the boat "Hope" was coming with a company from Yazoo City on it. They seem to be very happy with the thought of doing their duty. Although I only know 3 that were members of the Company, I could not but feel sad, when I wondered how many of that number would return to homes & friends (Bro. Wilson's overseer, & the Messrs. Waddell were the ones I knew). What a depressed feel weighed down my heart, as their voices grew fainter & fainter as they rounded the bend in the river, and their shouts & cheers ceased to be heard. I could not for sometime shake off the gloomy feeling. I knew though their faces were wreathed with smiles it was a masque for sad hearts. May God be with them & prosper our cause that their blood may not be spilled in vain. This evening the man Henry returned from the city where he had been after our mail. Brought Sister Mary a long & interesting letter from Pa, in which he stated the Home Guard company numbered about a hundred, and would be called out in an emergency. That Bro. Will had joined a company that there was one making up in Bro. John's neighborhood, and that Legrand, as young as he is wanted to go off with a company. Great, great excitement prevails. The teachers from Soule College, two were dismissed & 3 resigned. Annie Ransom, & Lucy Leiper took the music teachers places. If I had been home would've offered my services. Pa says he is afraid the college will be broken up. I am glad the men of Tenn. are turning out so bravely in the defense of their homes. I leave them in the hands of Providence, may He be with them.
Saturday May 5th 1861
        It rained a part this morning. We walked out this afternoon. I fed the deer. Received a long letter from Fannie Wilson today.
Monday 6th 1861
        It rained a little just after breakfast. Sister & I went down to Mrs. Wm. Wheeles'. She returned, but I remained all day at Mrs. Fred Wheeles', for Miss Mary Whitehead & I went down there. I went to learn Ada & Miss Mary to make wax flowers. Dr. Wilson went to town today, returned this afternoon. Tenn. has gone out of the Union. Hurrah! for her.
Tuesday 7th of May 1861
        A lovely day. Was sewing on a calico I gave the little darkie, Fannie. This evening Miss Mary Whitehead & I took a long ride on horseback, went way up to Mrs. Paul's, & saw her a few moments. We saw quite a large snake, on our return home.
Wednesday 8th 1861
        I finished Fannie's dress. Went out to feed John & Kate (the deer). They are more gentle than they were. We walked out, met Mrs. Fred Wheeles, & children returning from Mrs. Paul's. Had quite a little talk with them. A very large snake was killed here today.
Thursday 9th 1861
        Sister Mary & I on our way down to Mrs. Fred Wheeles' stopped by and got Miss Mary Whitehead, & went on down to Mrs. Fred Wheeles for the day. I employed myself learning Miss Mary & Ada Wheeles to make wax flowers. Sister Mary & Mrs. F. Wheeles called down on Mrs. Wm. Gale. They were much pleased. Sister Mary returned home late in the evening, but Miss Mary & I spent the night.
Friday May the 10th 1861
        I have been busy making, (or rather showing the girls how to make) wax flowers. Old Mr. Wheeles came down to bring Fannie to school, only staid a few moments. Mr. Wm. Wheeles, had been down to Mr. Wm. Cales', brought the news that the company from Satarchia would start next Monday, but tomorrow within four miles of that place, there would be a big barbecue given to them. They are anxious for me to go down. Don't think I shall. Bro. Wilson came after me this evening. Miss Mary & Fannie went with me, as far as their home.
Saturday May 11th 1861
        I was busy all day, making wax flowers. We didn't care to attend the barbecue. The Hope came up & threw off a paper, but it was so dark we could not find it.
Sunday May 12th 1861
        Found the paper this morning, containing no news. Mr. Wheeles was up and sat awhile, Bro. Wilson was up at the Quarter, & did not return until just as he was starting. He wanted Bro. Wilson to send some provisions down to Satarchia, as the neighbors were proposing sending things down to eat to keep them from spending any more money than they could help. Bro. W--sent two hams.
Monday 13th 1861
        Got up tolerable early to finish a letter to Fannie Wilson, but did not in time to send it by Bro. Wilson to town as I desired. He staid rather late in town, & did not bring me out a letter, consequently I felt disappointed. Wish some of my friends would write, but the prevailing topic is the war, so no one has an opportunity of thinking of anything else. Fed the deer today, though that is now my regular duty. The Hope & the Charm looked beautiful as they passed down, side by side, racing with the colors flying in the breeze. Mr. Norton (one of the Yandell overseers) told Bro. Wilson they received a letter from Cousin John today, that he was better satisfied. He will soon forget us all. Well we can't help it.
Thursday 14th 1861
        Finished mending both of my hoopskirts besides other things. It rained last night. I fed the deer this afternoon. A peddler came here today, but sister did not get any thing.
Wednesday 15th 1861
        A lovely day. We saw a big snake today, sent for Henry & had it killed. Been mending today. Mrs. Barksdale & Mrs. Paul sent sister word they would be down tomorrow to spend the day she & I walked to the river.
Thursday 16th 1861
        A lovely day. Mrs. Paul, Mrs. Barksdale, Josephine & Jennie spent the day, & with the exception of Mrs. P--, her two children & Jennie Barksdale, they went back home as Mrs. B-- was expecting Mrs. Dorrity (that was Miss Dollie O'Riley) to spend the night with her. The ones that remained with Sister Mary & myself walked down to Mrs. Wm. Wheeles for a few moments this evening. Mrs. Fred Wheeles was up to see us a few moments today, also.
Friday 17th 1861
        The day is lovely. Mrs. Barksdale came by about 11 o'clock for Mrs. Paul, & she & her children went down and spent the day with Mrs. Wm. Wheeles. They were anxious for us to go, but we could not. They promised to stop by this afternoon but did not. Suppose they saw we had company, Mr. & Miss Gale were here. Mr. Wheeles came by for Bro. Wilson, to get up to Mr. Paul's to drill in a squad of the Home Cavalry, which he did. Mr. Norton (John's overseer) told Bro. Wilson he had received a letter from Cousin containing a message which he could not deliver in a crowd. I wonder what it is.
Saturday 18th 1861
        Until about 11 oclock today cloudy. It is now raining [at] 11 oclock tonight. Sister & I started to walk down to the quarter, met the darkies coming after their clothers, had to return to the house. Miss Mary Whitehead, Mrs. Robberts & Lea Wheeles came up & staid a while. Miss Mary & I rode up nearly to the quarter to see an alligator that had been killed above & floated down. Bro. Wilson sent two negroes to turn it over for us, so we could get a good look at it. They then gave it a push, & it floated down in the river. Bro. W--got a letter from his Ma.
Sunday 19th 1861
        A Pretty day. Went out and fed the deer. Miss Mary W--& Mrs. Barksdale rode up & talked a little, but would not get down.
Monday 20th 1861
        Wrote Ma a letter, sent it up to the quarter for one of the workmen to mail. Quite warm today. A little cooler towards night. Sister & I went down to Mrs. Wm. Wheeles & Mrs. Robberts, & Miss Mary crossed with us over to Mrs. Brooks, who seems to be very glad to see us, insisted on our remaining all night, which we could not do. But Miss Mary came & spent the night with me, & while Bro. Wilson & Sister Mary sat on the porch, we promenaded the pavement for it was bright moonlight with only occasional clouds to obscure the brightness. We had a pleasant time chatting.
May 21st 1861
        Miss Mary left soon after breakfast. We walked up to the Quarter this morning. Mrs. Wheeles sent us each a beautiful magnolia. The "Hope" passed up earlier than usual, threw off a paper to Bro. Wilson. No news. The "Charm" passed also, later than usual. It has been a cool, damp day, rather bad for May. Have been mending, getting ready to start home.
May 22nd 1861
        I fed the deer after mending nearly all day, which I will soon be through with. A pretty day, rather cool. Bro. Wilson, went down to Starchia to attend a meeting to arrange a vigilant committee, as there are no courts now.
May 23rd 1861
        A lovely day. Mr. & Mrs. Hogan & Mr. Fred Wheeles called up here this morning. Sister Mary & Bro. Wilson went in to see them & so did I. I made two roses out of wax. Read a good deal in "The Virginians" by Port Cragon. Miss Hogan, her brother's wife, did not spend the day as we thought they were going to do. I finished Florence Nightengale on nursing today. It was the first time I ever saw Mrs. Hogan. I wish the Hope would come. I want to hear news.
May 24th 1861
        A lovely day. Messrs. Wm. & Joe Gale came up here. Sister & Brother Wilson went in but I did not wish to see them. Read on in "The Virginians", which I find quite interesting. Hemmed one side of a comfort for Sister Mary. She & I walked down to the river this evening. Bro. Wilson & I played ball on the porch this evening. I took Fannie, & went to feed the deer.
May 25th 1861
        A pretty day. Sewed a good deal on Sister Mary's silk quilt & cut out a great many papers for it. This evening Sister & I had been up to the quarter, & had just started back when we met one of the negroes that had been hauling wood, & he said there were ladies awaiting us at the house. On arriving there found Miss Josephine Cox, Miss Ada Wheeles & Fannie Wheeles, who are spending the night, & may be going to stay longer. Mr. Cox shortly afterwards arrived, & is here also. Heard of Col. Philip's death with Typhoid. He left with the first company, since being promoted. A very clever man I have heard, & leaves a wife & a large family of children. May God keep "our boys" under his eye, and bring them home in safety.
May 26th 1861
        A fine day. Bro. Wilson & Mr. Cox went up to church this morning. Mr. G--remaining here at Mrs. Paul's & Bro. W--returning. We walked out this evening [and] met Mr. Wheeles & Miss Mary. The two Wheeles girls returned home with them, but Miss Josephine Cox came back with us. I don't much fancy her. She is too pert. It has been rather warm.
May 27th 1861
        With the exception of being a little too warm, a lovely day it has been. Doing actually nothing today. Josephine & I walked down to Mrs. Wm. Wheeles', saw all there. Returned home before supper. She pretended to get very homesick, & cried like a baby this evening although she is fifteen years old, which behavior I was not at all pleased with.
May 28th 1861
        Still pleasant weather. Sister Mary, Josephine C--& myself went up to Mrs. Paul's to spend the day, on our way stopped by & Sister got out of the carriage to see if Mrs. Barksdale would not accompany us up, but she said she could not, but made us promise to return & spend the night with her, which we did after having a good dinner & pleasant day at Mrs. Paul's. We met Miss Olivia Galtney & her brother Tommie. The latter went to town, but I did not get any letters. Feel disappointed because I did not. As they (Miss G--& her brother) returned home, Mrs. Paul, Sallie, & Allen came up to Mrs. Barksdale for a few moments to see the pictures of Kink & Lester they had sent home. We saw also Cousin John's. Mrs. Paul sent over & got it from Mr. Norton. It does even do him justice. King's was taken in his dress uniform, & looked very well indeed. Mr. & Mrs. Lambeth & baby spent the night also at Mrs. Barkesdale's, also their nurse.
May 30th 1861
        One of Bro. Wilson's negro men got very badly hurt with a mule today. Mended Sister's hoop skirt. Finished "The Virginians", read some papers & a magazine, practiced on my guitar, & this evening practiced shooting with Sister's pistol. We walked down to the river in the evening. Don't know how I shall kill time until next Wednesday.
May 31st 1861
        Very warm, with that exception a fine day. Miss Mary Whitehead, Mrs. Robberts, Mr. Fred Wheeles, Miss Olivia Galtney, & her brother Tommy spent the day here. Mr. Fred Wheeles left not long after dinner, then Tommy G--& little Fred Wheeles went down to Mr. Fred Wheeles' with Miss Olivia, who intends going to a picnic tomorrow. Mr. W--said he was commissioned to invite all the young ladies, but I have not the most distant idea of attending. Don't suppose there will be but one beau,& that will be Mr. Cannon, & as he is Miss Olivia's "star" I suppose she will monopolize his company, as all believe he is addressing her. I went home with Old Mrs. Wheeles, Miss Mary & Mrs. Robberts, & spent the night. Mrs. Brooks & her little daughter were also there. They had started up to see us, but concluded it was too late to come, but said she would be up soon, after we returned to Tenn. Her daughter remained all night with Fannie Wheeles.