Sunday June 1st 1862
        Cousin Ann went up to see Mrs. Winship, remaining all day and night except a few moments she came back this afternoon. Poor Mrs. Winship cannot last very long, she is rapidly sinking. Capt. Frost came out this evening [and] brought a paper with bad news from Corrinth, though it is not generally believed. I hope it is all for the best, though I don't know what to think.
Monday June 2nd 1862
        Cousin Ann still at Mrs. Winship's tonight. Sister Maria, William, & children came in this morning. Cousin Mary with us yet. Ma went up town this afternoon with Sister Maria. She is looking quite sad, expect it is because William took the oath. The old French Yankee still here & no better.
Tuesday June 3rd 1862
        Cousin Ann returned a few moments this morning, but went back to Mrs. Winship who is very low. Aunt Judy Lytle was in town expected out to dinner, but she did not come, suppose she could not get off from Mrs. Winship. Sallie Lytle came out in the barouche after cousin Mary, & she went home. Ma & sister Maria went up town this morning & in the afternoon Ma & several of the children went up in town, & for awhile we had quite a quiet time. It rained a little just at night. Heard that George Wilkinson had been promoted to Lt. Glad to hear it. The Yankees don't know what to make of Beaureguard's movements. It is thought to be a grand maneuver on his part. The Yankees expected a battle last night, although they missed having it, don't suppose it was an unpleasant disappointment, especially if we had as many men as they had. Heard that old Parkhurst was taken prisoner, but this evening heard it contradicted.
Wednesday June 4th 1862
        Rather warm, & this evening cloudy & a little rain. Cousin Ann still at Mrs. Winship's, & William & family still here. Reported they (the troops) were fighting in two miles of town, which proved to be a mistake. Report says Beaureguard has whipped them at Corrinth, badly. There is something about a fight in Richmond. Mary & Lookie Duffer called to see Bettie & I today.
Thursday June 5th 1862
        Mrs. Hancocke & Miss Annie Murfree were out here calling this morning. Cousin Ann came home from Mrs. Winship's this morning. Bettie & Jennie went up there & staid a while. Ma & cousin Ann went up town & staid a while this evening. The Yankee Dr. came out to see the old Frenchman this evening. We think he will be moved tomorrow, glad of it. The report is our troops are very near here. Beauregard is still lost, no one knows where he is. Old Round's wife has arrived & I understand going to board at Mrs. Kitty Reeves. I think every body ought to be cut that pay attention to Yankees. William & his son Tommy spent the day in the country.
Friday June 6th 1862
        Sister Maria & cousin Ann were up town this morning. William went out to his place, & going to remain all night. Old Round's wife arrived today. Good news. Understand we have troops at Woodberry. Hope it is true, then we will soon be released from the rule of this villainous set. Frenchman was not removed, two of his friends came to see him, & from my window one of them looked a good deal like John Butler, though not so good looking. It would not surprise me any time to find our town in the midst of a battle. Heard that Mr. Roberts, that was taken prisoner, made his escape from Nashville by dressing in ladie's clothes, glad of it wish more of them would get away. (Jessie Sikes, George Riddley, & Charley Marchbanks, & others) finished reading the "Autocrat of the breakfast table".
Saturday June 7th 1862
        Cousin Ann & I rode up to see Mrs. Winship this morning, while up town heard good news that a hundred Yankees went out to Readyville & were all either captured, or killed except eleven. We came by the store, they had heard the same story. Aunt Nancy seeing the buggy had to come, & tell us the good news. Every body is rejoicing. Called by to see Belle Boles & her mother, they told us a good deal of news, had a pleasant little visit. She said Kate Marchbanks had received a letter from her brother, & he said all the boys fell in love with Bettie & I for talking so bravely to the Yankees as we climbed up on the fence the day they were prisoners. It had just the opposite effect from what I expected. I was afraid they would think us quite silly. We hope Andy Johnson will be cut off as he returns to Shelbyville, where there was a Union meeting today. Cousin Henry Tilford, wife & children (three, two twins) took dinner here. We like his wife very much. Her oldest little boy is very much like Bro. Jno's little Legrand. Eliza Nelson came out & spent nearly the whole afternoon, told us a secret, said Uncle Ephe & men were very near here, that Jno. Morgan also. The Yankees are expecting an attack, & are fortifying out near their camps. Ma was up town this evening, Cousin Ann is spending the night with Mrs. Winship. Kate Avent spent the day here. Rosa is spending the night with her.
Sunday June 8th 1862
        Cousin Ann came home this morning. Bettie went up to Mrs. Winships & spent the day. Mrs. Winship is some better. Mr. Winship & Mary Lytle rode home with her in the evening. Aunt Judy was in town but did not come out. The Yankees were all paroled that were taken except one Gray, that is a second Bill Spence that betrayed Bob Nelson & Tom Morgan, besides taking Pa's horses & Bro. Will's horses. Ma says if Stams captured her horses from the Yankees he is welcome to them. Old Gray is to be shot, & I expect it makes many hearts feel glad. He is the same individual that ordered our wagons from the farm to bring down some old Union families into the Yankee lines. They released Gray's son, which I'm sorry, as I didn't expect he is much better than his father. One of the Yankees to Dr. Murfree's fine horse, & been riding it about as if it belonged to him. They arrested Dr. Baskett & Mr. Jas. Avent today without a charge preferred against them, which is perfectly outrageous. Mrs. Avent & children went down to Nashville today. We don't know where they will send them, I'm glad so many of their men were killed and wounded. If they would return home & not interfere with us & our government, I would not wish them so much evil, but as long as they stay here, I am going to wish them all the harm I can. Rosa returned from Aunt Nancy's this morning. Mr. Rosenfield came up to tell Ma some good news, & took a cup of coffee with us, as he had been to supper. Several Yankees came up to see the old Frenchman today. Pa wrote a note up the Hospital, for them to come after him, but they did not.
Monday June 9th 1862
        Rather cool for this time of year. Miss Angie Wheeler (whom I met at Mrs. Winship's after cousin Ann) said her Pa said this weather reminded him of the time the cholera was so bad here. It was holiday for Andrew, & I could not take him up behind the buggy, so I had to take Emma & drive myself. Ma & sister Maria went to town this evening. Mrs. Rosenfield was here a while this evening. Glad to see her, like her very much. She told us this place was going to be attacked as a kind of a blind, & then proceed to Nashville, which they hoped to take. Hope it is true, for I am sick of the Yankees. They have been receiving reinforcements ever since the first alarm, & are fortifying out near town with fence rails. Bettie & I think of fasting for the success of our arms here. Kate told us what word Charley sent us &c. Heard the town was going to be burnt tonight, don't believe a word of it. Several Yankees have been to see the old Frenchman, but they have not moved him yet. That rascally fellow that claims to be a Pittsburgh lawyer was here after supper to see him a little while.
Tuesday June 10th 1862
        Bettie and I fasted thinking our troops might attack this place, but the day has passed & no trouble so far. I guess there must be at least 10 or 12 thousand Yankees here, by this time. I understood they said they intended having 15,000 by this evening. It is believed they went in search of our poor boys tonight. I think we should send up our prayers for their protection tonight. Cousin Tabitha Morgan, her two children, & Aunt Beck Snell spent the day with us. They have not found where Beauregard is yet; there is a great many surmises about his whereabouts, but echo answers echo. Cousin Ann walked up to see Mrs. Staley this evening a little while.
Wednesday June 11th 1862
        No news in the paper. Bettie & I ran over a few minutes to see Mrs. Maney to hear the news. She said a letter had been received in Nashville saying we had gained three grand victories in Va. & for us not to believe anything that Yankees had to say, for it was impossible for us to hear any good news from our army through them. Aunt Nancy Avent was here when we returned, & we walked up as far as Mrs. Pritchett's with her. Aunt Nancy asked Mrs. Pritchett if it was true about her son taking letters from here, to our boys to come home & take the oath. She said she did not know what the letters contained, but old Ashburn & Dr. Wheeler employed him to go, & promised him $25 & now would now pay him because he failed to bring a reply, & Tom Pritchett was in danger of his life while away, for our men were about hanging him as a spy. After we came back Bettie was taken quite ill & had to send for Dr. Bob Wendle. I think she was considerably frightened.
Thursday 12th 1862
        Bettie is a good deal better today. No news. Mrs. Joe Ewing called out to see Cousin Ann this evening. We walked down to see Mrs. Johnson, a few minutes this evening.
Friday 13th 1862
        Ma & Cousin Ann went up town this evening, & soon Ephe drove back saying two gentlemen were coming out to supper & spend the night, but said he did not know who they were, but Ma said we must treat them very politely. We puzzled our brain to know who they were, but all for no purpose, for we could not guess. At last we saw them coming, & we dressed intending if they were Union people, for we could see they were not Yankees by their dress, for they had on citizen clothes (or as the boys say "store clothes") we intended to give them a piece of our minds before Pa & Ma returned to lecture us about it. We went down & just gave it to the Union men & Yankees about here , when after talking sometime they told us they were Confederates, escaped from Camp Butler, Ill. & told us all about they trouble they had &c. &c. They said they were most afraid to come out here. Didn't know whether they would be welcome or not. We said Southern soldiers were always welcome, & made every exertion to render ourselves agreeable. I played & sang for them. They were from Tenn. One from Readyville, & the other from near Woodberry. One was a Mr. Wood, & the other a Mr. Sullivan. I went to school with Mr. Wood's sister. I pretended to be angry, so that the servants might believe they were Union. I don't like to act deceitfully, but occasions require it in war times. Fanny Maney spent the night with Rosa. William was out fishing today, & brought home some very nice fish. He seemed to be very inquisitive about who our guests were, but Ma wouldn't tell him. Ma bought me quite a pretty solid pink muslin.
Saturday 14th 1862
        Bettie & I went up to the store, & then around to the shoe store to see about her shoes, but they were not finished, & then stopped on our way back to see Kate Marchbanks, but remained but a short time as Bettie & cousin Ann were going out to Mr. Joe Ewing's. While we were in the store a Yankee came in and was telling about running back from East Tenn. for fear our men were trying to out flank them. They are great cowards when there is anything like equal numbers. They got back last night, & Col. Parkhurst was not taken prisoner as we had learned, but gotten back safe, much to our regret, but I suppose to Miss Joe Reeves' joy. Our guest Ephraim pretended to take fishing today & they left them out in the country to make their escape farther. They were friends of Mr. Tally's, but he promised not to tell on them. He tried to get them to take the oath, but they would not do it. Bettie & I told them what we thought of Mr. Tally. Fanny Maney went home before dinner. The children all went down to Aunt Sophia Lytles to a party this evening & came back perfectly delighted. We heard that Bro. John had been taken prisoner up at Shelbyville. He dispatched to Pa, & so he & Ma went up this afternoon. Don't know when they will return. Pa could only get a pass for himself. She went any way & the reason they wouldn't let Ma have one, they knew she would say for him never to take the oath, to die first. I'm glad Ma left her pistol here, as I shall try & use it, if I find it necessary.
Sunday 15th 1862
        This morning Mrs. Wilson (mother of Dr. Wilson) came in expecting to see Ma, & was quite disappointed that she did not. She spent the day & returned this evening to her brother's. Sister Amanda, hearing that Bro. Jno. was going to pass on the train, came in, in company with Mrs. Klirk, Mrs. W-- & myself also, went over to the depot, but Bro. did not pass, the train being so late, I persuaded Sister A-- & Mrs. K-- to take dinner with us. Mr. Duffer went over to the train with them, & while we were in Mr. Stevenson's parlor he came in dressed as fine as any dandy, & did not look at all like a widower of few weeks standing. He is in for marrying, to judge from his looks, & I must say was not at all favorably impressed. It might have been the conversation he struck up about taking the oath. I said very little, but my remarks were pointed. He had too much Yankee about him for me. When I began to denounce old Capt. Rounds, Mr. Duffer said I must not say a word against him, as he had taken several out riding yesterday (he among the number). I told him I would consider it a great disgrace to be seen with him. I can't bear to see men so willing to knuckle to such law down scoundrels after being insulted & trampled upon as they have been. It seems that the last drop of courage with the men of Rutherford Co. has died out, or else left for parts unknown, or take up its abode in women kind. Sallie Lytle, Kate & Mattie Avent came out & spent the evening & Rosa returned & spent the night. Capt. Frost was out this evening & brought the paper, no news, only their defeat at Richmond. (the Yankees) How thankful we should be for that victory. Mrs. Wilson thinks if Dr. Black & Mr. L. Black were arrested they would take the oath before leaving their families. If I was a wife, I would say go & die before taking that vile oath. Sister Amanda was telling me about Mary Spence telling Mary Turner to persuade her Pa to take the oath, so that she could ride around & have fun like she did, I guess she wants everybody to put themselves on equality with herself. She was bragging about having a Yankee Officer been & showed a handsome diamond ring she said he gave her. Poor goose, I wish I had never been intimate with her, but I will never be so again. Pa & Ma came just as we finished supper. Pa quite tired, & Ma not at all well. Said Bro. John, was looking quite badly, & that Mr. Cooper, a Union man, said he would be paroled in a few days. I hope nothing will induce him to take the oath. I think it is strange that Will McFadden's mother, uncle & sister insist on his taking the oath, when it is contrary to his conscience. I should feel quite guilty, were I to do such a thing. Bro. John said he never saw such running in his life, as they did (the Yankees) as they came from East Tenn. He said they nearly run him to death. They killed a doz. horses there one night, but it made little difference, as they took any they saw belonging to other people. Pa brought sad news to sister Maria, the death of her brother Walter. The wound on his hand healed nearly up, when he went out & took a good deal of exercise, which threw him into a fever, which caused his death. Poor fellow, I'm sorry he died away from home, but no doubt he had kind friends to attend him.
Monday 16th 1862
        Brother Will, Sister Maria & children went to her mothers this morning. Cousin Ann was in & spent the morning. Ma has been sick all day. Kate Avent & Sallie Lytle are spending the night with Rosa, & Billie Buck Duffer with Ephe. The Yankees brought in a dozen of our men prisoners. I heard they were citizens they had picked up. They had 80 at Shelbyville, & out of that six were soldiers. Ma said they had old grey headed men, she judged they must be sixty years old. I hope we will be revenged yet. I understand old Bill Spence has started for Washington City on some more of his villainy. I hope our boys will catch & hang him. He is a vile rascal.
Tuesday June 17th 1862
        Aunt Nancy Avent was out here a little while this morning. She told Ma of an opportunity of writing to Sister Mary & Legrand so I wrote to Sister Mary, though didn't write so any stranger could tell anything about it, where I lived or anything else, so if it chanced to fell into the Yankees, they wouldn't be much wise. I think it doubtful if, she herself understands every thing in it. Pa is going to write to Legrand. We heard he had not reenlisted & spoke of coming home next month. Pa is going to write him word, if he comes he will have to take the oath. I hope he has joined the army again, for I want my brothers to aid in sending the Yankees to their long home. Mrs. Tom Johnson was out here a little while this morning, came to inquire about Mr. Johnson. Mrs. Rosenfield was up to see Ma also. Bro. John did not get home, but sent word not to be uneasy, that he would be down soon. If he should take the oath I could trust no one. I know he won't. I have more confidence in him than to believe such a thing of him. Ma was up town this evening, while she was gone Mrs. James drove by & got a book belonging to her son Fred that Bro. John had sent down. I did not see her, heard that she was very much opposed to Fred's coming home, going to send word for him not to come. Mrs. Wm. Anderson & Kate Marchbanks walked out here late this evening. Their visit did me a great deal of good, as I had quite a headache, & a little blues. Ma returned while they were here, brought a rumor that our man Starns had captured a lot of their men & wagons, hope it will be confirmed. The 9th Michigan have moved their camps over quite near us in Maj. Maney's lot, much to our regret, they can lay their hands on many things which they will not fail to do, & keep. Garden or nothing else will be saved. When will this unholy war come to an end, not until our country is ruined I fear.
Wednesday June 18th 1862
        Sister Maria, Bro. Will & Tommy drove by here enroute for their place, no one but William got out, as they said they didn't have time. Bro. Jno. failed to come today, though we sent over to the depot. Pa wrote to Legrand & sent him some money. I've been quite busy sewing this evening, & a Yank came to buy milk, & while waiting for it began to speak in disrespectful terms of our Southern boys, & I got up & walked out, & blazed out at him. There is no telling what rascality he will attempt. I will never speak to him, but I got so vexed with him I couldn't help speaking my mind. I heard they brought down Judge Marchbanks as a prisoner this evening. I was so sorry, was in hopes he would escape them. I must go up and see Kate soon. I wish the good news about her Brother Charley & those other boys escaping may be true. It was so reported yesterday, that every preacher, teacher, merchant & Doctor, or any other person whatever engaged in any business whatever, should be compelled to take the oath before going on it. I'm glad it is not to be put in effect yet, for old Capt. Rounds told Pa today that it would not be served yet, & I hope ere they have a chance our men will be back. Yesterday they arrested all the ministers. It has come to a terrible pass & it gets worse every day. Mr. Baldwin says they 20th of this month will be a terrible bloody battle, that the whole earth will be strewn with dead bodies of the Yankees, so that it will have to take 6 months to bury them. I think the Southern people ought to fast & pray that the Lord might be on our side.
Thursday June 19th 1862
        Had a nice rain yesterday, which has made it quite damp & cool today. Brother John failed to come. I haven't felt very well today. Ma went up to see Mrs. Winship, but she was too low to see any one. The notice that every one should take the oath has been served, & only those that are under bond are exempt from it, so I guess tomorrow will be more like Sunday than ever. Oh! me when will we be relieved from this tyranny. The Yanks were very much frightened today. They learned our army was in large force near here, & they sent out in different directions to see if they could find any of our men, but so far they have not. Good many Yanks have gone to Nashville so I understand, & many think they are retreating. It is reported that old Gen. Mitchell is at Shelbyville. I hope his entire force, including himself, will be captive ere he arrives here. They first spoke of occupying our lot, but through the influence of some gentleman changed. Mrs. Eaton closes her school tomorrow, as Yankee officers take it for headquarters.
Friday 20th 1862
        Today is the one that Dr. Baldwin said would be the great battle, I wish I knew whether it had come off, or not. No news up town. A good deal of stir among the Yankees. One Regt. left this morning, & I hear that another leaves this evening or tomorrow. Went up to see Kate Marchbanks, Aunt N. Avent. Mrs. Jas. Avent was there, going to spend the night. Stopped at the Boles to speak to them, as I came home met Mrs. Robt. Wendle. Addie Ledbetter & Laura Ledbetter stopped & had a little chat, as we stood talking Mrs. Reeve's carriage passed by, but we turned away & did not speak & on returning home found it had been out here with the two Mrs. Reeves in it, to get Ma to go & see old Mrs. Rounds. I see through the old woman's actions, she can't fool me. Then to be enquiring so particularly after me, as if she cared a row of pins whether I was dead or living. If her girls don't get visitors until I call on them, they will wait a long time. I saw Corean Reeves, who is in deep mourning for Confederate Officer, out at the gate talking to a Yankee officer. It is a wonder that the ghost of Lieut. Bagley don't haunt her, if he could, no doubt would. I learned that Laura Carter of Nashville was married to a Yankee. She came very near marrying a Confederate Officer not long ago. Brother John did not come home. Judge Marchbanks was sent down to Nashville, also Mr. Robert Smith, (although he has taken the oath) just because two men staid all night at his house while he & his wife were absent from home. Mr. Richhammer was also arrested today. Don't know for what. Pa has his doors closed on account of that order, I heard thirty doors were closed and only seven open. I'm glad to hear the majority is on our side. Kate M-- said she heard that the Yanks said they were going to confiscate all pianoes that the girls practiced Southern music on & I expect the next thing families will not be permitted to visit. A Yankee asked a citizen if he thought a picnic would be an easy matter to be gotten up. Yes said the man when our army returns. Pretty good. They have been enquiring where the best springs were, & said if they gave one they would have their bands out to play on the occasion, & have a splendid time. I know well enough, I shouldn't attend.
Saturday 21st 1862
        I suppose we had just as well quit looking for Bro. Jno., & leave off sending over to the depot for him, for he has disappointed us again. There is no use trusting Union men, no matter how plausible they are. William Carney, Tommie, & Tommie Butler stopped on their way to Mr. Butler's to hear the news. Mrs. Dr. Bedford paid us quite a sociable visit this morning. Dr. Robt. Wendle & lady were out to see us this morning. I like them so much. Cousin Ann & Bettie came in this afternoon from Mr. Ewing's. A Yankee had to ride in the carriage with them, before they permitted them to pass the pickets. Ma & cousin Ann went up to see Mrs. Winship, found her so low that cousin Ann remained with her. Heard that old Bill Spence & wife had gone on to Washington City. I suppose it was to him we are indebted for the last two notices, not even a Dr. can go and see a sick person without taking the oath or getting permission. Bill Spence said he was going to have the reins drawn tighter in our town. I hope he will soon reap his reward. I understand Mr. & Mrs Hord are Union too, & are down on our family. I've got no use for any such.
Sunday 22nd 1862
        There was no news today, no service except at the Baptist church, & Mr. Pendleton is a Union man. I heard that 8 of his members withdrew from his church on account of praying for the Yanks. I think all Southern people should withdraw.
Monday June 23rd 1862
        Rosa, Bettie & Cousin Ann went up town this morning. The two first came home before dinner, but cousin A-- remained until late in the evening. They all brought good news for us, said that Gen. Buel was retreating. That we had a large army at Shelbyville & that Morgan was in 75 miles of here. Old Dr. Wheeler has gone up North because he thinks our boys will soon be back, & he will get paid off for his meanness. Sister Maria was in town, & I understand getting her mourning clothes for herself & mother. Kate Avent is spending the night here. Rosa was up there this evening. All seem in fine spirits.
Tuesday June 24th 1862
        This morning heard that Richmond has been taken though it is not generally believed. Pa sent word back to Cousin Ann that Will Wilkinson would call out & get a bundle she wanted to send out to Mr. Ewing's. Bettie & I fearing he might call for us left home, as I don't want to see people who have taken the oath. We went up to see Mollie Crockett, met old Mr. Crockett there whom I had not seen for months. She (Mollie) said her husband Mr. Robt. Crockett & Tom Tucker sent their love to me. I hope it is true about the exchange of prisoners. Poor fellows, they have had a hard time of it. It was rumored they were to pass here today, but it proved a mistake. Mollie told me that Aunt Judy said she thought Bill Spence was blamed too much in town, & she did not think him such a bad person as everybody thought him. I would not be surprised the next thing I heard that Uncle Ephe had come home, & that cousin Mary & Mary Spence were very intimate. I think policy can be carried entirely too far. We drove by Mrs. Winship's to see how she was & by Aunt Nancy's to hear the news. No news, but very cheerful. We stopped by a few moments to hear how Mrs. Wm. Anderson's little child was, that has been quite sick for several days. Mr. Wilkinson had not been out, neither did he come this evening, which I was glad of. Heard that Holly Springs, Miss. had been taken. I should like to know where Dr. Wilson & Sister Mary are, they were to spend the summer here, provided they could get up here. I wish she was here, though I wouldn't have him take the oath for anything. Poor Brother John hasn't been permitted yet to come. It is reported that a large battle will be fought near Shelbyville soon. A Regt. from here went up to the assistance of the Yankees today although Old Gen. Mitchell & Buel are both there. Kate Avent is still with Rosa. Buck Alexander has taken the oath & come home. I'm glad I'm not acquainted with him, hope I never will be. Who can we trust. A Yankee Capt. died at Mrs. Maney's yesterday. I don't care how many die.
Wednesday 25th 1862
        Wrote a letter to Legrand & one to Bro. John tonight. Cousin Ann & Ma rode up town this morning. Bettie is spending the night up there. It is raining right hard this morning.
Thursday 26th 1862
        Bettie still up town, Ma & cousin Ann were detained some little time after breakfast by the rain & when they got up town Dr. Morgan had been gone about 2 hours, which I regretted, as I wanted to send my letter to Legrand & tell him he must not come home unless he could come honorably. I sent the letter up to Mrs. Wm. McFadden, that was to be carried to Brother John, as I understood some of them were going to Shelbyville. Cousin A-- had not gotten back tonight. I sat up at Mrs. Buck Duffers, with her little son Peter, who is very ill. Mr. Jim Murry spent the night here, is the son of the Gen. Murry, that was prisoner the same time Pa was at Nashville, & he was sent up North & died there a poor man. I hope his death will soon be revenged, yes very soon.
Friday 27th 1862
        Came home from Mrs. Duffers between 4 & 5 o'clock, have not closed my eyes for sleep the whole night, went to sleep [and] didn't get up until 9 o'clock, dressed ate breakfast, went to sewing& never felt considerably worse as I expected. I didn't get to see Mr. Murry, who is not quite so old as Legrand, & so business-like for his age. Said he knew Charley Marchbanks. He was to go up to Nashville today. Bettie came home today, & Lela Morgan came with her & staid with the children until evening. Rosa went up to Aunt Nancy Avents' this afternoon. Cousin Ann came home with her. I hear that all Southern sympathizers are very cheerful about the war. Soloman Cox, the man that waited on Pa when he was in prison, took dinner here & is spending the night. He took quite a fancy to Pa while he was there. Said bad company carried him there.
Saturday 28th 1862
        Have a slight cold today. Cousin has been sick in bed today. Sister Amanda came in town with brother Will today, went back again this afternoon. She looked a little pale, but quite pretty & was so anxious to hear something from Brother John & speaks of going up to see him soon if she & Uncle Tommy can get a pass, which we heard they could do. She told me a great secret, that Uncle Ephe is at home & not a servant knows it. I'm almost afraid to write it down. I hope he will leave before he is found out, only three of his oldest children know it. Mary was very prudent when in town the other day not to have mentioned it. From several hints, I believe Uncle John is near home too. Rosa went out to see Josey Turner with sister Amanda. Bettie went up to get Aunt McCulloch burial clothes, as a note was written in asking cousin Ann to get them, though she is not quite dead, but very ill. Mrs. Duffer's little baby died this morning, & Bettie & I are going to sit up with the corpse tonight. The Yankees have been whipped at Charleston, glad of it. I think the Yankees will soon take French leave, from all hints I get. I heard that one of the detestable things said he was going to have Ma & myself arrested. I guess it is the one we had the quarrel with.
Sunday 29th 1862
        Came home after being up all night. Addie Ledbetter, Eliza Nelson, Mr. Drumright, Mr. Reps Duffer, & Mr. John Brown also sat up & not one of us went to sleep. The body had to be placed in the casket soon after supper, as decomposition had begun. As soon as I returned, went to sleep & didn't get up until 10 or eleven o'clock. Ma then waked me up to take charge of the keys, as she & cousin Ann were going out to Mr. Hord's to see Aunt McCulloch, & Pa came home about 4 or 5 o'clock from Mr. Duffer's little child's burial, & Uncle William Lytle came with him & waited to hear from Aunt McCulloch. Cousin Mary Lytle & Willie were here a few minutes this evening. I was compelled to speak to the Yankees today, (as Ma was not here) on business, but I didn't want to do it.
Monday June 30th 1862
        4 Companies were ordered to leave here this morning. Glad tidings were brought us. We have whipped the Yankees near Memphis, Richmond & taken a train of wagons, which I'm rejoiced to hear. When Pa wrote the news out he also mentioned that a young gentleman the name of Ridell, that was in prison with him, would come out home with him. Of course we were all curiosity. In a few moments it was announced he was coming. After they had been here some time, Bettie & I went down, found him quite a nice young man. Rather dasky, than otherwise. We went down after they had been here awhile & found him quite a nice man, very prudent, "noncomittal" on all subjects in regard to himself, rather a don't care air about him that I like. He is staying all night, & Pa has invited him to make our house his home while he remains in Murfreesboro. Sister Maria, enroute for her own home, drove by here in the morning, but not having time to get out, didn't stop until her return in the afternoon. Ephe spent the day with them. Mrs. Acking of Shelbyville stopped by to see if we had any message to send Bro. John, & we all joined in saying not to take the oath.