May 7th 1862
        A lovely day has passed, but unappreciated, our minds being in such a disturbed state. We expected Finie Burton & Kate Marchbanks out to see us probably to spend the day, but were disappointed in both, as they failed to come. We also looked for Tommie Jones. He may have left, as he did not call. I suppose he found an opportunity of slipping away in the great excitement of today, & went. Bettie had several letters to send to Clarksville by him, & shall have to mail them now. Yesterday evening he called on Bettie, & afterwards asked for me, it was the first time I ever saw him, & as much as I can judge, liked him very well, indeed found nothing to dislike about him & still nothing very striking. It was while he was here, I heard for the first time of Will Rucker & Will Wilkinson taking the oath, which I must acknowledge was no little surprise to me, or as some would express it, I was thunder struck, for I thought their pride would have revolted at anything so base & cowardly. Bettie & I, had made two handsome bouquets to send them, but were prevented which I am thankful, as they are so detestable as to take that oath. This morning Ma was going to take our boys that are prisoners their breakfast but, thinking so many would send provisions, and as she sent them good many nice things yesterday. The first strawberries we had were taken to them. I would give up my share any time for our poor soldiers, nothing would be considered too great a sacrifice on my part for their good, or comfort. Before I had eaten my breakfast, Mrs. Mollie Crockett sent out for me to send some flowers, for a young lady to send to Tom Morgan, brother of John Morgan, as he is among our prisoners at the jail. I had quite a handsome one made, but I am afraid he had not the pleasure of receiving it, as they are not going to allow our men to receive such demonstrations of sympathy as were expressed by the ladies of Murfreesboro. Ma took them up some comforts and bedding last evening. Poor fellows. They were thing's left here, that belonged to the hospital. She also took some clothes up to Tom Morgan, as she understood he was in need of some. She carried Bettie's & my bouquets up to some of the boys. When old Capt. Frost (who by the way comes out quite frequently since Pa, arrest which was three weeks last Tuesday). He is ever a welcome visitor as he is better than any newspaper and seems so disturbed about Pa. He brought a message from Mr. Crossman (who is a Union man, though we think a very clever one and is staying for protection, which we are very glad to have him do, as he carries letters to Pa, or any thing else, or getting a pass for Ma, to have hauled wood from the Quarter to have sold. It is a mutual accommodation, & satisfies all parties. Bettie & I give him some hard cuts though, about people taking the oath). Well to return to the message he sent Ma, that she must neither send or carry anything to the prisoners today, for, if she did the Yankees might insult her. She and cousin Ann would not take them when they first went up, but afterwards sent back after some clothes, said she could have them sent in secretly. When they came back they brought the same old tale, that we must prepare for a battle, as one was expected here before night. It seems as if it was always "bad news." So without more ado about the matter, I went upstairs and began packing my trunk, but before I finished dinner came on, & with it Mr. Crossman, but brought no news. He is afraid of committing himself to us, for fear our secession tongues would get us into trouble, as he is of the opinion that we talk too much. Scarcely had we gotten up from the table, when we saw Mrs. Kittie Reeves & her grandson Levi coming, at the same time heard the band of music coming, played by rogues (as that is what I call the Yankees, more appropriate than any thing else). We saw also about 2 thousand Yankees tramping down the Lebanon pike, & to my astonishment stopped in the grove opposite our house (owned by Uncle Wm. Lytle). Thinking they had come down to drill I went in and slammed the door, & had every blind in the house shut, [that] they might know I would not condescend to see them drill. I also called all servants and children in, & said sufficiently loud for them to hear, that I didn't want anyone to see them, but to our astonishment they stacked arms and seemed to be waiting for something, on enquiry found they were expecting prisoners from Lebanon. Soon our yard was filling with Yankees, asking for flowers, to all Ma said help yourselves (well knowing they were going to do it), which I guess was the best way, but I should have refused. Scarcely had they begun, when they heard that the other men with our men prisoners were coming, but I had enough flowers to tie up three bouquets. Bettie Gillespie had gotten some also we did not have to wait long after getting down to the fence, on the pike, before we saw our poor boys being brought along with as much pomp & show as possible. There were about 5,000 to guard less than a hundred of our men. Our men looked so noble, & had such a manly bearing, that they looked less like prisoners than those that had them in charge. I forgot I was before so many men, especially when I began to see my old friends among them. I told them never to take the oath & they answered "that had played out", and a great many other things, that enraged the Yankees very much. After I saw Jessie Sikes, George Ridley & Mr. Roberts I scarcely knew what I did do. I know when I screamed a whole camp hissed at me, but what I cared for that. I was perfectly insensible to any feeling save sympathy for our prisoners. An officer ordered us to the house, but contrary to military rules & regulations, we did not go until we got ready. Good many cursed us when we hurrahed! for "Jeff Davis", John Morgan, & Beauregard, but we heard very little of it until an old man that wanted to pick up our flowers that we had thrown to our soldiers & when we said he must not have them because they were confederate flowers he cursed me, & kicked them, & I have since been sketching him for Bettie's benefit, and for our entertainment tonight, as we are sitting up until three our four o'clock, as they have threatened to burn our house tonight, but seeing no prospect of a fire, went to bed & slept very comfortably. An officer rode up and offered to buy one of my bouquets, (I suppose as an insult) I told him he could never get one for any consideration, but if he had been a Confederate soldier he would be welcome. So the chap rode off. Charley Marchbanks, & Col. Wood were also in the lot of prisoners. I was so much excited [I] did not recognize them. They were sent off on the train this afternoon. Mrs. Kittie Reeves left shortly after we came up to the house. Mrs. Edwards came over & staid awhile this afternoon. Cousin Ann & Ma went to town in the buggy, but did not get to see any of the prisoners.
Thursday May the 8th 1862
        Another beautiful day. Cousin William Tilford came to see Ma, had decided to go to Nashville to see Pa. She is to give her answer in a day or two. Mr. Staley & lady called out on Ma & Cousin Ann this morning. Bettie & I went up to see Kate Marchbanks to console her about her brother. I feel quite sorry for her, she seems much distressed. On our way back met Capt. Frost, who stopped us & had quite a little chat, passed a Yank further down, turned off my head [as] I always do now. Ma, & cousin Ann rode up to town this evening. While they were gone, a Yank came after milk. I let Pricy give him two glasses of milk, for I will not go into see any of them. Mr. Avent came out & said Pa would be home today or tomorrow. It is too good for us to believe. We had a long letter from him today, by Mrs. Troadway. We had a large bowl of fresh strawberries today. How I do wish our poor boys could get some. Mr. Crossman expects one of his friends out here today, to stay. It is rumored we have had another big battle, I hope my friends are safe.
Friday May 9th 1862
        Pa & Mr. Wendle are coming home tomorrow, I'm so glad. Ma went up to town this morning. Cousin Will Tilford, Aunt Maney & McFarlin took dinner here today. The latter took the oath today, the former took it some time ago. There was an old lady came here today by the name of Mrs. Jones, that refused to take the oath. Said the Yankees might blow her brains ou t& bury them before she would take it as she had 3 sons & 7 grandsons in the Southern army. Hurrah! for her. It is rumored that Jeff Thompson is in Ky.
May 10th 1862
        Not a more beautiful day could have been selected than this is. It would have been splendid for a bridal one. If we were influenced altogether by outward circumstances, (or appearances) we would be the happiest of happy. Pa is coming home, and we are delighted, but not more so than he is, as he has been a prisoner in the Penitentiary ever since the 15th of last month, away from his family. Ma, Jennie & Helen went over to the depot to meet him. Mr. Christy & Mr. Rickhammer came out to see him. Mrs. Henderson & Mrs. Levi Reeves called this afternoon also, but being very busy preparing the table for Nicie's wedding supper, (she is an old family servant that is to be married) did not see any of them. We have been quite busy all day. The table was set in our dining room, and quite a pretty one too it was. She was married in the front hall by Uncle Brack, their colored preacher. Everything passed off very nicely. Ada & Emma Ledbetter, Kate Marchbanks, & Dick Ledbetter were out and sat until bed time with us. Mr. Buck Duffer was also up here & saw the ceremony performed. Mr. Crossman went to Nashville today.
Sunday the 11th 1862
        It has been a beautiful day, rather warm. Cousin Ann & Bettie the only two that attend church today. They did not return until late in the evening. Mr. John Bell, Jr., Mr. Peter Duffer, & Capt. Frost came out to see Pa this morning. In the afternoon, Mr. Boles & his daughter Bell came out, & they had not been gone long when Mr. & Mrs. David Wendle & two daughters came out to see Pa & the rest of us. Mr. Crossman came up from Nashville today. He brought me a letter from Lucy Wilson, which I must answer very soon.
Monday May 12th 1862
        The sky above is cloudless, but our even "tenor of our way" has been some what interrupted by the arrest of some of our best, and most worthy citizens. Messrs. Dromgoole (our Mayor), Jas. Avent, Jno. A. Crockett, Tom Robberson, Wm. Ransom, Maj. Childress, Rev. G. T. Henderson, Maj. Maney, & to get Dr. Baskett, and there is no knowing who will be next, for it seems though most polite are the first arrested, & I verily believe, if a person did not open his mouth, they would have them taken up on suspicion of his having looked contrary to his established rules. Poor Maj. Maney,
[see the Kimberly letters for more on the Maney family in occupied Tennessee]
walked home with Pa, partook of a social class, little dreaming that he would be among the number taken so soon. He with the rest of those gentlemen were in the store congratulating Pa on his safe arrival home, little thinking that in a few hours they would be in a like situation, & this is called "a land of freedom". It is sacreligious to call this oppress, and down trodden nation a land of liberty, where tyranny stalks in open day, & private grudges of years standing are brought to light, & revenge is considered sweet. It seems strange that when a certain man (for I shall not term him a gentleman) sees fit to go to Nashville, a number of our good men are taken away. Surely justice will over take him yet, though it may be slow, for our Father that watches over us in secret will not let a wicked man prosper, & if he fails to be punished in this world, he will one day stand before the Great Tribunal, & there receive his reward. We scarcely have a thought, much more open our mouths, for fear Pa will again be sent to prison, for he & Mr. Wendel are both bound over $10,000 each, & though I'm not inclined to anticipate evil I feel quite confident that he will have it to pay, for I think there are tools low enough for any work, & they would be willing to swear falsely, if gold could be gotten by so doing, & as Bill Spence has a quantity of money that he has gotten by robbing the widows, orphans, & poor, even to the servants he will not lack means to pay his workman should they agree to do the dirty work of swearing falsely, especially if his conscience hurts him, & he would like some means of getting rid of his ill gotten gains. In the papers it is stated that Jeff Davis has appointed the 16th of this month for prayer, for the protection of our army & the Southern Confederacy, but I have no idea it will be allowed to be noticed here, but we can pray all the more at home. They can't deprive us of our thoughts, though I have no doubt they would, if they could. We will certainly know how to appreciate freedom when we have it once more restored. Bettie and I got a scolding for our long tongues just before supper, & at that meal we were as quiet as "little mice", though we got no praise for our uncommon nice behavior, & conversation was a drag & they looked as if they wished us to say something, though we kept provokingly quiet and seemed intent on enjoying our strawberries, and soon after it was over came to our room to chat to ourselves, without interruption from our dear prudent parents with some of their sage advice. Ma was up town this morning, brought the news that Sister Amanda had a little daughter born last Thursday, so I have a little niece, & a little nephew also, that I have not seen yet. We heard the Yankees were going to take in their pickets, if that be true, I can go out to see them both, but I think it must have been a false report. It has been, that they entertained such an idea, but hearing that Kentucky was rebelling & coming to join the South since the emancipation law has been passed in Congress, & that we were fighting in "Cumberland Gap", that John Morgan had captured two trains of cars, one containing a safe with much money supposed to be in it. I hope the day is breaking for us at last. Capt. Frost & Mr. Pricket were both out here awhile this evening. Little Laura Davis & Laura Ledbetter came out this evening after a piece or two of music for Kate Marchbanks & Addie Ledbetter. It is growing late & Cousin Ann I know is getting anxious for me to extinguish the light. So I will prepare for bed, hoping to sleep, the sleep of the innocent, while the moon with its broad face keeps a good humored watch over me.
Tuesday May 13th 1862
        The citizens that were arrested yesterday were sent off on the train to Nashville, including Dr.'s Basket, King, & Robert Wendle, leaving quite a small number of physicians in town, and I don't know what we would do if the small pox should break out, for it [is] already here, we know of two cases among the Yankees, and there is no telling how many more there are that we do not know about. They had these two cases placed in a house on Main St. and gave out they were sick Confederates, thinking the ladies of the place would flock to see them, & sure enough one lady went & was much frightened, as well as shocked when she found what was the matter with them. Some thought the Yankees took that means to spread it through out this place. Cousin Henry Tilford ate dinner with us today. Said he had lost his pass, & they refused to give him another, & that is what he gets for taking the oath. Bettie, Jennie, & I went over to Mrs. Lewis Maney, while there Mrs. Hancocke & Miss Annie Murfree, also Mrs. David Maney & Miss Sallie Belle. We came away soon after the latter arrived, met Helen just at the fence, & persuaded her to return home with us. We then concluded to walk up to see Mrs. Henderson, but we saw about 20 armed ruffians coming down the street, so we concluded to stop in to see Mrs. Pritchet, as we have been intending paying them a visit for some time. We had just started to go when several of those scoundrels came to search the house, I gave them a most scornful look & passed out. They searched every house in town & got a few old shot guns, & an old pistol from here, but should they attempt loading it as it is now, woe be unto them, which I hope they will do. As I saw an officer this evening riding down the street trying to show off, I wished from the bottom of my heart, the horse would throw him & break his neck, & I can't believe it is much of a sin either, but, must we blame the Yankees for trying to show off when some young ladies were out on horse back, also trying to cut a dash, without even an escort. I sent them word they had better mind, or the Yanks would insult them, for, it was the Misses Duffers. I don't know how they took the message, & I don't care. When we arrived at Aunt Tildy Henderson's the soldiers were ransacking her house, pretending to search. She looked very sad, but who could be otherwise here now, for it seems the silver lining to "the dark cloud that hovers" over our land will never be seen. The news came that Norfolk & Portsmouth have fallen into the hands of the enemy & that our gun boat "Merrimack" was blown up by our own people to help it from falling into the hands of the Federals. If something (almost a miracle) is not done soon, we shall have to yield our hearts up to despair.
Wednesday May 14th 1862
        It was a pretty morning until about one o'clock, when all of a sudden it looked as if we were going to have a terrible storm, but it contented itself with a nice little shower and stopped. Ma & Cousin Ann went up town, and while there went by the hospital to see our two wounded soldiers that were brought in yesterday. Ma took them nice strawberries & cream, nice flour hoecakes & butter. Bettie & I sent a lovely bouquet to Mr. Henderson, for which he returned a nice little note of thanks. Miss Millie McLain called on Bettie this morning. Mr. Crossman went to Nashville this evening. Took a letter for Lucy Wilson from me, enclosing one from Kate Marchbanks. The paper called the Dispatch was surpressed today, suppose the reason was it told the truth too plain. Said that Beauregard had not left Corinth, & had no idea of doing so, but instead had been strongly reinforced. The Yanks expecting Morgan every time they go out to stand guard, carry one of the citizen's (without permitting them to have arms) thinking, I suppose, if Morgan does attack the town he will be prevented from firing on them by the unarmed citizen being there. I hope Morgan will hear of it. Bro. John was slightly wounded in his little finger at Pittsburgh Landing.
Thursday May 15th 1862
        Bettie & I drove up in the buggy with Andrew behind. We arrived at home safe after my driving, though I know little about it. Went to see Mrs. Winship, (who is dying with consumption) also Mrs. Leiper, & by the store, arriving home about 11 or 12 o'clock, stemmed strawberries for dinner, & a nice large bowl for our two wounded Confederate soldiers that are still in the hospital. Ma & Cousin Ann took them up to them this afternoon. One of the soldiers said he was looking for his mother soon, & Ma told him to tell her to make our house her home while she remained. I was lying down reading all of the afternoon. Three Yanks were passing by trying to get some flowers from over the fence, when Ma went out and gave them some & they came in the house, & Pa treated them. Bettie & I were upstairs in the hall, and was much amused at what they had to say, as we could hear their conversation from below. Two of the scamps came again tonight to call on Pa.
Friday May 16th 1862
        Today was the Fast day appointed by Jeff Davis, and we kept it until dinner, though we had no service in our churches. It seems hard that we are not permitted to pray to God, when and how we want to. Ma received a letter from Sister Mary today, written about a month ago, by an "underground railroad" as they term it, & we were delighted to learn they were so well. Haven't been very well today, slept a little during the day consequently did not rest well tonight. Mr. Crossman returned from Nashville today, failing to see any of Mrs. Wilson family, I didn't get an answer to my letter. Several Yankees came into Ma's yard & she gave them flowers. Ma & Cousin Ann went up to the hospital to take our prisoners some nice things to eat, & Capt. Round's commanded them to come no more. He is a villain, "clothed with a little brief authority: he flatters his little soul he is somebody, but did he but know we have heard he was only a drummer." Martha Duffer spent the night with Rosa.
Saturday May 17th 1862
        Rather warm today. I feel some better today. Bettie & I grew very much excited at a remark made by Mr. Crossman about our President Jeff Davis. He is nothing but an old Union man anyway. Promised if we would write letters South, he would try and get them through, though should I write as I feel he would not send them, & if I wrote otherwise they would be little satisfaction either to those written to, or myself. Capt. Frost was out a little while this evening, & told us a good deal of news. Said our men had cut a bridge near Huntsville, just so that it would stay up, and a large body of Yankees went to cross & was precipitated into the river. Hope the last one was killed. He also said that we had 75,000 men in 40 miles of this place, too good to be true. We are so often disappointed now. Mrs. Tom Johnson & several of her children were here awhile this evening.
Sunday May 18th 1862
        A lovely day has passed. Cousin Ann, Bettie & Helen went to church this morning. Mr. Crossman went to Nashville, regretted I didn't know of his going in time, I would have written a letter to some of the Wilson family. Ma sent Sister Mary's letter to Mrs. Wilson to read. Ma, Pa, & Jennie went down to see Uncle William Lytle this evening. Pa went up to Mr. Dromgoole's. He has been released from prison for a few days on account of his ill health. Mr. Henderson came up with him, but will have to return very soon. Maj. Childress is up on a six days furlough. Heard that Mr. Hoard was in earnest a Union man, & that Mr. T. O. Butler had signed the paper, for our State to return to her old allegiance, but I hope I have been misinformed. Two Yanks came here and asked for some flowers, I told Leathy (the servant) she might get them some, for I don't speak to them. One of them seem to be very much pleased with her. She tied them each a bouquet, & they gave her each 5 cents for her trouble. She told them Ma never sold flowers. One of them asked Helen, was she a "secessesh", & she said yes indeed she was. Capt. Frost was out here late this evening & staid a little while.
Monday May 19th 1862
        Cousin Ann spent the day with Mrs. Winship. Mollie Crockett & Mrs. Jno. A. Crockett were out calling this morning. Several letters were received in town from their distant friends, written in high spirits. Bettie and I walked down to see Mrs. Edwards this evening. Ma, & Cousin Ann, went up to the hospital to see our Confederate soldiers and carried them flowers and strawberries.
Tuesday May 20th 1862
        Trimmed the children's hats today. Don't feel very well tonight. Ma went up town this evening. This evening took a careful list of those Union men. Heard that Mr. Butler said they put his name to it without his agreeing to it. I hope it is a mistake about his being a Union man. Heard it was a mistake about the "Merrimac" either being taken, or burnt, or sunk. Was quite sick for a while, just before I retired.
Wednesday May 21st 1862
        Rained for sometime, then cleared off & proved a pretty day. Dr. Wendle vaccinated several of the children this evening. Cousin Kate McCultong & several children rode out here awhile this evening. I sewed on Cousin Ann's quilt this morning. Went out & helped to make a cake, then got ready to see Cousin Tabitha Morgan, but Cousin Ann & I went to the store and I asked Tally about putting his name to the paper requesting the State go back into the Union. He seemed proud of it when I first asked him, but I gave him such a big piece of my mind and talked so fast he couldn't say much. We met Pa going home when we came up, so I had a good time raking Tally over about being a Union man. Poor Pa looks so sad & is growing so sad, I feel so sorry to see him look that way. I have noticed more this week than ever before. Since that old dog Capt. Round insulted him last Monday when he asked for a pass. He threw down his pen, saying as he did so, that taking the oath was the only condition of Pa's getting a pass. The rascal, I would love to see him hung, he & old Bill Spence & a number of others, & feel no regret. Cousin Ann & I stopped at Mrs. Anderson's a few moments, then went around to Mrs. Leiper's, & on our way stopped & talked a little with Aunt Nancy, then by Mrs. Bole's, & talked a little, & stopped a short while at Mrs. Henderson's, then came home. I would not be surprised if I was not shortly arrested for my long tongue. O how I do hope our Confederacy may be victorious in the end, I can't conceive of defeat being possible. What would I do if the last spark of hope was extinct?
Thursday May 22nd 1862
        Bettie spent the day up town. Mrs. Crossman came up from Nashville this evening. Rev. Mr. Staley took dinner with us today. Ma went up today to see our two prisoners, & took them some nice things to eat. Heard that they were fighting in Corinth. Also that Elisiah Childress (Bettie C's brother) had died. Poor child, I feel so sorry for her, she always seemed so devoted to him. The Yankees say it would not surprise them if we have a battle here in less than 48 hours. I sent a bouquet to Eliza Nelson, & one to Cousin Tabitha Morgan, today & a bowl of strawberries to Aunt [unclear] Snell.
Friday May 23rd 1862
        This morning two Yankees came here [and] asked for Pa & some flowers. Ma gave them flowers, but Pa not being here, they did not see him. They spoke of Lincoln calling out one hundred thousand more men. Ma says, do you suppose you will get them? "o yes," they replied, "we can get them from Tenn. & Ky." I suppose they anticipated drafting those that have taken the oath & I hope they will place in the front ranks every one of the traitors that have taken the oath. All those gentlemen that were arrested returned home today, with the exception of Maj. Ledbetter & Col. Ready. Mr. Dromgoole said the latter was looking badly. I did not see any of them that returned. Ma & Cousin Ann saw Mr. Henderson. They went up to the College to see our prisoners, and to their astonishment found that one had taken the oath and gone home. Just to think he was one of Morgan's men too. I felt so badly about it, but heard his wife was at the point of death, & like it was that, that forced him to take it. The Yankees no doubt will publish that not less than a dozen took the oath in place of Mr. Handley. Oh! I hope the other poor fellow will not [do] such a thing. I felt so wretched when I have placed confidence in any one, & it is betrayed by taking that awful oath. Bettie & I went to see Finie Burton, but she was not at home, talked a while to her mother. She spoke of trying to get a pass to go out, but old Rounds said he had charged the pickets to let no one out, but to permit the country people to come & go. We think it is a Yankee trick, to get them in to take the oath. He said they were stricter every day. I hope his glory will soon be over, for he has already done enough meanness. We went to Mrs. Keeble's, did not find Miss Sue Brady, but saw Mrs. Nattie Keeble & Mrs. Brady. While sitting there talking saw old Rounds ride by on Mr. Menefee's horse he had stolen, just riding it about in open day. Puts on airs as if he was somebody at home, but the way he treats ladies, everybody knows he is nothing. Called at Mrs. Dromgoole's on herself. Helen (her daughter), Mrs. Mooney, and Mrs Staley (our Methodist minister's wife) after going away from there passed Miss Helen McVain's house (the Old Academy) & saw Lilly Brown sitting out talking to a Yankee Officer. Mrs. Settle, children & baggage left town, & got beyond the line's without the Yankees finding it out until too late to stop her. Hope she will make her way safe, expect Mr. Settle was some where near. Ma received a note from Sister Maria, & she said when she heard from Bro. Will, he was sick & down at Sister Mary's. Every body is expecting a fight here in town.
Saturday May 24th 1862
        It was drizzling rain this morning, but it soon cleared off. I was in hopes it would have proved a disagreeable day, so the country people would have been prevented coming in town to hear old Andy Johnson speak. I heard he had very few to hear him speak, & most of them were soldiers, which I was glad of. An old friend of Pa's was to see him today, a Mr. Hall. He wouldn't stay long, said he wanted to leave town before they began speaking. He is the gentleman who was so kind to our two friends the Dr's Tiddings of Ky. They have staid a long time with him, after they left here. They have joined Morgan, but for a long time they could not make their escape. They can boast of many narrow escapes they have had when they return home especially the one they had here. Uncle Tom Turner has been here today. A remarkably prudent man, won't say a word scarcely. Said Sister Amanda heard from Bro. Jno. a short time since. He was well, but Bro. Will was sick down at Sister Mary's in Miss. and that Legrand was not well. They were all in the fight down at Pittsburgh Landing. Sister Amanda is not going to name her daughter until Bro. Jno. gets back home. Cousin Henry Tilford was out here also today. Rosa spent last night at Uncle Avent's, & Kate returned with her this morning, & going to spend the night with her. Sallie & Harriet Wendle came out to see the children this evening. Bettie & I walked down in the lot, met Mrs. Camp, that told us her husband had been discharged from our army on account of ill health, but she wanted it kept a secret for fear he would be arrested. Said she could not tell any thing, but if Pa would go down to see him, that he could get all the news. She asked permission for her horse to stay in the lot, and I told her I guessed it might, but would ask Pa, and it was all right, and he told the servants not to turn it out. Ma then got Pa to go down to see him. He said our boys were all in high spirits, that they had enough provisions to last them a year, that troops daily flocked to our army at Corinth, & there was no danger of our boys being defeated. He also said Morgan had raised 10,000 men from Ky. & it was thought he had recaptured his prisoners that were taken in Lebanon. It is certainly cheering to hear such good news, for inside the lines here we seldom ever see, only the dark side of the picture. Bettie and I were sitting out on the front steps when we saw some men coming up, but it was so dark we could not distinguish who they were, but when we found it was not Pa coming from Mr. Camp's, run in and shut the door. Ma stepped to the door, and on finding it was strangers stepped back & got a light, & lo & behold it was that little Yankee from the convalescent hospital that came up, and told Ma when Pa was arrested that it was negro news, & wanted to know about her money, & I firmly believe if he had thought that Ma had had money in the house he would have robbed her. He wanted Ma to pay him to get Pa out of jail, said he was a Pittsburgh lawyer. He wanted Mr. Tally to make out a bill and receipt it, so he could go to the government officer & make him pay it, & when Mr. Tally refused, he swore he would get as much money out of that old government as possible meaning the U. S. It was he and two others (I guess of the same stamp). One was a Capt. & the other had some office, I don't know what, Pa came after awhile, & still they staid on, & when supper was announced they went in, although they said they had taken theirs before the came. I suppose they thought they would get to see us & go off, and report that we had received them, but only Pa, Ma, & Cousin Ann went in to supper. They asked for music, both before and after supper, but I would cut my hands off before I would play for Yanks. I thought it was a great piece of impertinence in that little chap bringing those others up here to hear music, as he said just as if we dare not refuse to see them. The very idea, I hope I will die before I am found receiving a Yankee. They said they had never received a single kind word from any one in Murfreesboro, & had no sympathy for secession. How can they look for kindness when they have come to take every thing away from the citizens down South, & ruin every thing we hold dear.
Sunday May 25 1862
        A bright & beautiful day. I accompanied Cousin Ann & Bettie to the Presbyterian church, before we got to church met Jimmie Leiper, who said one of their Regt's had been ordered off. Just after service began, the Yanks got up and left. I was glad Mr. Eagleton reproved them, though I've heard since they received marching orders & had to leave all the churches. Just as we got to the corner met their band in full blast, escorting Andy Johnson to the depot (that craven hearted villain). I deliberately turned my back and would not look at him, although there were officers standing very near. Mrs. Leiper was standing out at her corner, and said a short time before she was badly frightened, thought we were going to have a battle here, but learned all the fuss was about that old traitor. We met Cousin Tabitha Morgan & Lucy Leiper and chatted with them, they dropped in at Aunt Nancy's to see how she was, & to hear the news, but did not sit down. I wanted to tell the good news I heard last night, but feared it might cause the arrest of Mr. Camp. Kate Marchbanks stopped to talk with us, and related a funny instance that happened there the day before. A drunken Yankee called to one of her servants and said, "are you for the South, or North", she said South. Laura Davis asked her why she didn't say for Jeff Davis, which so enraged the drunken Yankee he jumped over the fence, rushed in the house saying he considered the ladies under arrest, but Mrs. Anderson said she did not so consider herself and sent off after a guard, & when he found it was coming, he said he would withdraw if Mrs. Anderson would take back what the children had said, & say she was for the Union, (which she refused to do) he would withdraw himself, the guards coming carried off the individual to jail. 9 or 10 Yankees came here, & Pa gave them as many cherries as they wanted to eat. Mr. Crossman came up from Nashville today. No news of course, with him. This afternoon we were lying down, when we saw Ma come tipping upstairs with mysterious air which I could not make out. I rushed out on the back porch, (as I was undressed) and saw Ma pass through with a (what proved afterwards a confederate) soldier. She seemed greatly excited. He was one of our soldiers that had escaped jail, just half an hour ago & Ma was trying to disguise him so as to let him escape. He changed his clothes [and] shaved off his whiskers, (Ma giving him some of Pa's clothes) making him look like quite a different man. Ma carried him up something to eat, he would not eat much said he had been to dinner, & would not take any more money, he had plenty. I hope he will get safely back to Starn's Cavalry. He said we had 5,000 men just above here, had had a fight, & we killed 30 or 40 Yankees, & it was that night he was taken prisoner. That was the first time we had heard of the engagement. They always keep a defeat such a secret. This soldier came very near being discovered. There were three Yanks in the front hall who said they had come up to make Ma's acquaintance, as they heard Ma fed their prisoners when Morgan captured them, & when our escaped prisoner asked for the master of the house, the servant asked him in to the front hall, & lo! & behold there sat the man that had captured him a few nights before, and not having any suspicions, they took no notice of him, & he asked Ma for some water and then told his story, so Ma had to play a double game, make herself agreeable to the Yankees whilst getting our soldier off, & I felt vastly relieved when he got off safe. Ma went up town this evening & Kate Avent returned with her home. Cousin William Tilford, wife & daughter stopped by & made a visit awhile this afternoon. An old sick Yankee came here this evening late, & Pa had his sympathies aroused [and] consented to let him stay all night, made me so angry io cried until bedtime & would not eat any supper. He was put into poor Legrand's room to sleep, just to think, he may be lying out on the wet ground, wet hungry and sick & then for his enemy enjoying his room. I didn't like [it] one bit.
Monday May 26th 1862
        Bettie & I would not go down to breakfast until the Yankee was through. Pa tried to joke me about my early rising, but I was so mortified I didn't have much to say. I made up my mind if the Yankee remained to insult him before dinner, but he shaved & left. Poor Mr. Camp was arrested last night, paroled until morning, & going to be sent to the Penitentiary today. I feel so sorry for him, though he might have known he would have been arrested. The Yankees say Joe Duffer (who has deserted) told on him, but he declares he did not, & got Ma to go down to Mrs. Camp and explain it, but she still believes he did. Bettie& I staid in our room nearly all day. Fannie Maney was over to see Rosa awhile this afternoon. Cousin Ann and Ma went several places today. Before they returned Kate Marchbanks sent for us to come up and spend the night, which we did, enroute met Pa, and he advised us to be very prudent in our remarks, as he got it from good authority that the ladies were all soon to be arrested. Fanny Burton took supper at Mrs. Anderson's, went home tonight. We were all in fine spirits, & hoping soon to be liberated from the foreign foe.
Tuesday May 27th 1862
        A lovely day. Kate, Bettie, Tuppie Anderson & myself went to several stores & at last went to Pa's. Saw Mrs. Wendle also Ellen Spence come in the door, but we did not speak. Tally seems to take a great delight in telling me Bro. Will had gotten home. One side paralyzed. I don't know what I said, I was so angry, though as I didn't attract attention, supposed I must have behaved lady like. Came by & told Mrs. Anderson good bye & on my way home met Pa, who confirmed the bad news. I don't know what I should do if deprived of shedding tears, I believe go crazy. Why didn't he die before returning to bring eternal disgrace on the family. He has ever been a draw back. I could have stood him dying so much better, but I know Bro. John will not take the oath. I had rather our throats cut, or turned beggars on the world than that Bro. John should disgrace himself by taking that dirty oath. How little Brother Will thinks of his family. It will ever be a stain on his poor little children. I blame Mr. Butler as much as I do him, for he tried to hide him & then to think sent for Bill Spence, the last man in the world, & one he could not have given more pleasure than to have had to take the oath. Bill Spence said he would have revenge on Ma for treating him so, & I think he certainly has had it. I hope he will not be long spared, to [do] much more mischief.
Wednesday May 28th 1862
        A lovely day, until very late in the evening when it began to cloud up. I have been feeling quite bad all day, quite weak from not eating any thing since breakfast at Mrs. Anderson's yesterday morning. I drank a cup of coffee which is all I have taken today on my stomach. Pa brought home still worse news, said Uncle Ephe & Brother John were both coming home, & that the Southern Confederacy was looking very dark. I know one thing Bro. John will never come home. Bettie told me Pa said so, I haven't been [down] stairs since I came up yesterday morning. Pa thinks it is contrariness on my part, because he spoke so cross yesterday to me, but I have no appetite for anything I feel so miserable. I've been looking for William Carney & family in town all day. Hope I may never see him again. I do wish he would never come here while I'm an inmate of this house. Cousin Ann spent the day up town. It has begun to rain, & I doubt whether she can come home or not. Mrs. Leiper, Mrs. Ransom, & cousin Tabitha Morgan came out here this evening & as I could not go downstairs cousin Tabitha came up to see me. She talked so kind and told me so much good news since she left my heart has felt a little lighter. Said the militia had all been called out from the Northern states & that the people were all rising up in Maryland, & they thought Washington would soon be in our hands. I'm afraid to rejoice, for fear it is not true. William Carney was in town with Tommie, but did not come out here, glad of it, but they say he is coming tomorrow to spend the night, hope it is not true, for I don't want to see him. Cousin Ann came home after the rain. Didn't feel hungry, so ate no supper.
Thursday May 29th 1862
        Rather warm today, remained up in my room until supper, or rather until the sun was down. I've felt quite unwell all day, only ate a biscuit & drank a cup of coffee for breakfast, the first I have eaten since I came home from Mrs. Anderson's, I did not eat any dinner, didn't feel like it. William Carnet was in town today, on his way out met Rev. Eagleton, brought him out in his buggy. I did not see them, heard that William looked as well as they ever saw him. I hope he will regret taking that oath, I wish there was no blood in his vein that is in mine. Cousin Kate McColloch & children spent the day here, but I did not see them. Sue Brady called out here this evening, & Bettie went out riding in the barouche with her. That old Yankee Frenchman came & staid until after dinner, although no one paid him any attention. Maj. Ledbetter & Col. Ready got back from Nashville today, on two weeks parole, I am glad they have gotten back, even for so short a time. It is reported the Federals are fortifying Nashville in a hurry. I am glad to hear that as they must certainly be expecting an attack of our men. I heard that Mary Spence accompanied old Andy Johnson out to her Uncle Billy Spence's the night of the Union meeting, & remained over night and returned, as he came in the next morning. She is the Miss that says if the people of Murfressboro don't stop talking about Bill Spence he will make them suffer for it. Hurrah! for her. I forgot to mention in here about a grand parade they had one day over a little secession flag they got from some private family. Pretended as if they had gotten it in a fight, & tied it [to] the mane of one of their horses & dragged the flag, & strewed flowers where the flag went along. That was a contemptible act, equaled only by the arrest of Mr. Winship, to make him look at their Union flag that Mrs. Matilda Spence and her niece Mary made them, just because he helped raise the Confederate flag when it was first hoisted in our town, but he would not look up, but smoked away like he didn't care a fig for all of them & their old flags.
Friday May 30th 1862
        William Carney & family did not come in as we expected, but he was in town, very boozy fell out of a buggy, but got sober enough to go home this evening, or rather to Mr. Butler's, where his wife is now. I haven't seen him speak to him yet, only caught a glimpse of him, as he passed out the other day. He says Jno. Butler has made him Lieut. Col. of his Regt. Am glad to hear it. He is a clever fellow & deserves to succeed. Aunt Judy Lytle & Kate eat dinner with us today, but did not spend the day. Ma & Cousin Ann went over to see Cousin Julia Ann Patterson, who had just returned from the south, at least Fayetteville, but she had heard very little news. Old Mitchell (a Yankee Gen.) is retreating & 75,000 of our cavalry are in hot pursuit of him. I hope they will capture them all. Understand "Old Bill Spence" has come back, guess he has gotten frightened & thought his neck was not safe [in] "Dixie". Scarcely think he went all the way to Huntsville & back in such a short time. I'm glad to learn it was a mistake about our prisoners up at the college taking the oath. I hear they are at the penitentiary.
Sunday May 31st 1862
        Rather warm today. Aunt Judy Lytle came by & left cousin Mary & Johnny here to dinner, while she took me out to see Sister Amanda with her pass. I was rather uneasy for fear some union man or woman would stop Aunt Judy & say something to her and find out I was along, for they wouldn't begin to give me a pass. I had on cousin Mary's hat, two veils & was to pretend I was quite sleepy. The guards didn't say a word to me, & I got home safely after an hour or two's visit out at Uncle Tommie's. Cousin Mary is going to remain with us, & Aunt Judy & Johnny went home. That same old French Yankee came again this morning, & by Pa's permission remaining all night long. He has not been down to any of his meals, been quite unwell. I hope he will not be troubled much longer with any such. It is reported there is bad news for us, but I do not believe it. I will copy the dispatch "Near Corrinth May 30-To Gov. johnson. We are in possession of Corrinth. The enemy are retreating South. H. W. Halleck, Maj. Gen."