Tuesday July 1st 1862
        Raining all day. Mr. Riddell still here. He is quite a mystery, I think we understand him better than he imagines. Cousin Ann & Ma went out to see Aunt Sallie in the morning & in the afternoon went to Uncle Tom Turner's. They have a pass for four or five days, & they are trying to make good use of it. Helen remained out at Aunt Sarah's tonight. Good news of yesterday confirmed. Mr. Riddell went up town about 15 minutes, brought us a large lot of candy back. We were not downstairs, so he and Pa had to entertain themselves the best they could, taking a toddy, &c.
Wednesday July 2nd 1862.
        A lovely day. Mr. Riddell got to the depot just as the train was leaving, rather too late. Didn't seem to care about being left, came back here. Bettie & I were getting ready to go out calling with him, when on looking out, who should be seen driving up but William Wilkinson, much to our astonishment, for we have said so much about people taking the oath he must surely have heard. I told him about taking the oath, and I expect he got offended, but I don't care. He said he had heard from his brother George last week, & that he had received directed to his care a letter from Mr. Sikes. I wish I could have seen it. Mr. Wilkinson did not stay long, as we went in with our bonnets on & made our excuse. We took Mr. Riddell up to see Addie Ledbetter, Eliza Nelson, Lucy Leiper, & Kate Marchbanks. I think he liked Kate best, though he is rather indifferent, some times he seems to like talking to Bettie, then again to desire my company. I seat myself at the piano, & play away without seeming to notice him, & he in his turn seems perfectly indifferent, when all of a sudden he would make some remark on what I have been playing, which would lead me to conclude he had been listening the whole time. He is not a flatterer like most men, but quiet, & easy manners. Kate Avent is staying with Rosa tonight. Ma & cousin Ann are getting ready to go to Shelbyville in the morning.
Thursday July 3rd 1862
        I forgot to mention that Aunt McCulloch dies yesterday, & was buried this evening, & I understand she even did not have a minister to sing or pray. They could not get a permit to have a funeral preached. Ma & cousin Ann started to Shelbyville this morning. They were to meet sister Amanda on the road, & all go together. They started before we were up. Mr. Riddell left on the train today. We miss him very much. This morning to my surprise he hoisted the piano & asked me to play, & seemed to take quite an interest in my playing. I can't help but think his indifference about every thing is assumed. Pa accompanied him over to the depot, which proved a fortunate thing as Bro. Jno. & the rest of the Confederate prisoners were carried down to Nashville today. I am so sorry that Ma & Sister A-- will be so disappointed, in getting to S-- too late to see him. Kate Avent went home early this morning. A Yankee rode up here, & I sent Prisy out to see what he wanted & he said Dr. Fritz wanted some wine, if Ma would please send him some. He is the old sick Frenchman that Bettie & I used to say guarded the house with his canteen. We didn't have any wine, but I permitted (against my will) Prisy to put some cordial into his bottle. Pa saw as he thought two Yankees coming, & he quietly walked out the back way, but they proved citizens, but the servant did not ask them in. Heard that Maj. Childress gave dining & had old Capt. Rounds & others of that stamp to it. It is very strange, I regret to see persons come under so much. I'm almost afraid to write that we heard that Mr. Riddell was a Yankee spy though we don't believe it, not even Pa. I don't think it possible, he seems such a good Southerner, & I will not believe it until I have proof.
Friday July 4th 1862
        Ma & cousin Ann got back soon this morning after spending the night at Uncle Tommy's. They got ready, & went down to Nashville determined to see Bro. John. He sent us word that we talked too much. Mrs. Anderson & Mrs. Marchbanks went down to see Judge Marchbanks, and much to my astonishment heard that Miss Bettie Childress was escorted on the cars by the Yankee Capt. Rounds. She & her father are bound for Sandusky where John Childress is a prisoner. Old Rounds must have given them a pass. He was enquiring if Mrs. Anderson had a pass & I suppose thought Ma had not & he would have the pleasure of having her taken off the train, now wasn't he disappointed & won't he grind his teeth in rage. Joe Reeves says she can't see why Will Wilkinson should cut his horse just opposite her house & refuse to speak, as it is no worse to take Yankee boarders than to take an oath against his brother in the Southern army. Either is certainly bad enough. Hope I will never be guilty of either. Mr. Jno. Kirk took dinner with us today. Helen & Jennie are spending the night at Uncle Avent's.
Saturday July 5th 1862
        The children returned this morning accompanied by Jamie & Mattie Avent & Lela Morgan. Mattie remained until after dinner. Lela is spending the night. Bettie Hayes took dinner with Rosa & is quite a pretty girl. Bettie Gillespie went with Ephe up town in the buggy. Kate Marchbanks stopped her & was telling her how much she admired Mr. Riddell, thought him so handsome, &c. Pa has been quite sick today. Mr. Pritchet was up here a short time today. Corene Reeves & Joe Reeves were at the negro ball last night, with Capt. Rounds (a married Yankee) and Col. Parkhurst, quite a come off for our city.
Sunday July 6th 1862
        Ma & cousin Ann astonished us by returning safely home this morning, & had not heard a single word from Mr. Riddell. They saw brother John, & he is determined never to take the oath. I wish William had had one-half the determination. Lela Morgan returned home this morning. Jennie & Helen accompanied her, but returned before night. Rosa is spending the night with Kate Avent. Mrs. John Spence sent me word they had [a] prayer meeting this afternoon, but Ma went up town this afternoon so I did not attend. They arrested Mr. Eagleton's two sons this afternoon, am sorry, but they should have gone back to the army ere this.
Monday July 7th 1862
        It has been quite warm all day. Bettie, Helen & Jennie were up town this morning. Rosa returned home from Uncle Avent's this morning. Sister Maria and William came by and stopped awhile this afternoon. The Eagleton brothers took the oath. Shame upon them. Exciting news. The pickets on the Lebanon, Liberty & Manchester pikes were fired upon, & I understand a number were killed. A large number of Yankees went out, & just come in (now ten o'clock) bringing about 60 persons. I can't see how we can live through so much suffering. I wish if the Southern Army was coming it would hasten on.
Tuesday July 8th 1862
        This morning Ma & sister Amanda went down to see Bro. Jno. carrying his provisions & clothes. Jose Turner came in William's barouche and is staying with Rosa. Mr. Watterson, a Confederate prisoner who had taken the oath came up on the cars, said he thought Bro. Jno. would be paroled & come up tomorrow. He ate dinner with us, seems very polite, & quite intelligent & if he hadn't taken the oath, I would think him quite nice. I must confess to be crowded into the filthy jail, filled with vermine, with little air, scarcely food to sustain life, & then threatened if they did not take it they would be forced in their cells, or else lose their life. It is awful to think of those low born Yankees (Andy Johnson at the head of them) acting towards our men so cruelly. The Yankees did not succeed in taking a single one of our men prisoners last night; but bringing 19 citizens, old & young, making no exceptions, & when the ladies sent the poor men their dinners, the Yankees ate it up & sent word it was very nice, that they enjoyed it. I hope it will make the last one of them sick. Mr. Joe Ewing is among the number of prisoners. Our little army outside of town numbers 75, but the Yankees did not get to see them. Prisy seems intensely gratified whenever she hears any bad news for our army & quite angry when we rejoice over bad news over the Yankees. I understand the Union men are getting considerably frightened.
Wednesday July 9th 1862
        Ma & Sister Amanda came up from Nashville, & some man not knowing sister A-- was married fell very much in love with her. I expect if Bro. John had been on the train he would have kicked the fellow off. Poor Bro. John failed to get paroled. Couldn't have a trial, on account some say of Andy Johnson [being] sick (others drunk, more likely this last). The widow Corcan (the name Miss G. Reeves is known by) was on the train carrying on extensively with Rounds, much to the disgust of all modest & refined people. William Carney took Sister Amanda & Josie Turner out home this afternoon. Mrs. Kate heard, came out all dressed up on horse back, looking very spry. Quite a warm ride, but suppose a young widow would say "never mind the weather so the wind don't blow." She came to enquire of Ma about a cousin of hers that was a prisoner. As soon as she left, Ma & cousin Ann went up town, while away Mrs. Adnerson & Kate came out, staid until Ma returned. They wanted to hear from their father. It is rumored all the Yankees except the cavalry are to leave here. Hope our men will bag them before they get very far. Ma was advised not to visit much after Friday. It is thought Morgan's men are near here. Much to my astonishment Ma spoke in high terms of Mr. Riddell. Mrs. Anderson said her father, Judge Marchbanks, thought him quite a nice young man. I am glad every body thinks that, as I have been out calling with him on the girls. Charley Marchbanks wrote back word for Kate to tell me that he thought Jessie Sikes really believed me in love with him. "Fiddle sticks" if he was not a Southern prisoner, I might say how presumptuous, but I will only keep a powerful thinking.
July 11th 1862
        I've been sewing this morning & had not company come in unexpectedly would have finished easily tomorrow, but just after we had eaten dinner two ladies, whom Pa met while in prison came here & while I carried them up to take off their bonnets had to have something prepared for them to eat. It was a Mrs. Hobson, & a Miss Turley from Nashville. They expected to have come up [to have] seen their cousin & return on the next train, but they failed in getting off soon enough, so they just came out here. The young man is a Mr. Richardson of Ala., was in Camp Chase, made his escape, got this far South, [&] was captured & going to be tried as a guerrilla. Ma accompanied the ladies back to prison, taking clothes & provisions with her. Mr. Paul & Simp Harris are also in the cell, with Mr. Richardson, & of course they got some of the nice things. While they were away, Bettie & I walked down to see Mary & Lockie Duffer, found their little brother very ill. Offered to come tomorrow night to sight up & told my reason for not being with them tonight. That must be quite an unhealthy place, there seems to be someone continually sick there. It is a good thing I did not stay as I was quite sick through the night. They brought in more citizens, & many hope they will be the means of having other citizens released, as they can prove it was Starns men, & Starns sent them word to come out and meet him. He was ready for any of them.
Saturday July 12th 1862
        This morning Ma & the ladies went up to see the prisoners, after their return they ate a snack, & Pa, Bettie & I took them in our carriage over to the depot, we had to wait until about 3 o'clock before the cars came down. They had run off above here. He Misses Reeves were escorted by 13 Yankee soldiers for protection from our men. The very idea: 50 or 60 Yanks went down the pike to hunt for our men. I hope our men will capture them. I haven't been well all day.
July 13th 1862
        How to begin, I know not. I was aroused early this morning by firing. It has surely been an eventful day. I knew the firing must come from our own brave boys. Sprang from my bed, rushed to the window, called to cousin Ann & Bettie, we dressed hurriedly, not knowing what moment our house & yard would be full to overflowing with either our men or the frightened Yankees. The blue coats began to make a bee line through our yard & front yard, asking Pa to protect them, but he told them to push on, & acting on his advice they kept moving. It was amusing to see how frightened they were, although it was such a serious time, I prayed for victory, while I hissed the frightened Yankees on, expecting every minute to received a parting shot from some of them. Just think, only the day before they were our masters, I thought what would be our fate, if our poor fellows were whipped. The engagement grew general in a few moments. Persons dared not venture out on the square, if they did a report & a vacant saddle would be seen as the horse would dash by, carry their fate to their comrades. Our boys, after forming behind some one story buildings, made a bold rush gaining the court house, but many fell ere they reached the door, and although the Yankees had every advantage they were forced to surrender, & our prisoners turned out to seek their families & friends. Two of them stopped on their way home out here, Mr. Peyton & Mr. Brothers. They looked so happy but who did not except the dusky forms that hovered around our front steps. The gentlemen were afraid to venture up town, as they were firing from the houses, so much it was dangerous to go on the street. In the meanwhile they had attacked the camp down by the river where the battery was stationed, & on the approach of our men threw themselves into a hollow square with their artillery, pointed to resist a determined attack, and as our men had nothing but shot guns they could not get in range & were compelled to fall back three times. But later in the day a flag of truce was sent, & in a few minutes they consulted, surrendered 15,000 men including sick & wounded, including cannons, Camp equipage, which was mostly burnt, & small arms. This is one of the greatest victories of the war considering the number engaged. Gen. Forrest reports 17,000 men consisting of his men & Texas Rangers. (a number were Georgians) With a single piece of artillery besides being the attacking party, I'm sure the hand of Providence guided & directed our boys, for without a higher power that handful of men could never have succeeded against such odds. Our Great Father saw our suffering & travails. Gen. Duffield was wounded early in the engagement, & taken to Maj. Maney's. Gen. Crittenden surrendered to Mrs. Hagen, the lady with whom he was boarding. He was the man that came up to have several of our men hung tomorrow. Some say that was why the attack was hurried. Yes old Gen. Crittenden said we had not a right to the air we breathed (just yesterday). I would like to have asked him who had a right now. Two Genl's, four Col's & ever so many Lt's, Capt's and others [were captured]. A glorious haul. Gen. Duffield was paroled with a number of others that could not be taken away on account of their wounds. When Col. Lester went up on the square, he asked where is the army that took us, & Gen. Forrest proudly answered here they are, pointing to our handful of dirty & worn down by travel boys that stood by. A nobler set never breathed than those rough looking fellows. Nobler hearts never beat. The poor fellows that were waiting for the Yankees decision about surrendering, went fast to sleep so fatigued were they [by] forced marches & no rest. The Yankee Col. awoke our officer by saying "we surrender, we surrender." That gave the Yankees some idea how independent our boys were. We saw a Texas Ranger ride hastily over to Mrs. Laws, & Ma thinking he needed something made us run over and ask [if] we could do anything for him or any of the rest of his comrades. He was introduced as Mr. Dodd of Ky. (though now a Ranger), thanked us, [but said] he had been provided for by the kind ladies up town. Found him quite nice. Saw a Mr. McKa come riding up kissing his hand & we all rushed out to shake his hand. Pa asked if he had ever met him before, but he said no but I'm a Confederate soldier. Very proudly he replied. We insisted so, he had to get down, come in & get breakfast, but would take nothing to drink, which made me think all the more of him. Said he never drank anything. While he was breakfasting we trimmed his hat off beautifully with flowers, not knowing then & until sometime afterwards that he was a single man. He had heard that two stray horses were here, & thought one of them might be his, but neither were, but sent us word by cousin William Tilford this afternoon that he found his, & many thanks for our kindness. That morning as our soldiers were starting to attack the camp by Maj. Maney's, we saw two of our men coming toward our house. We insisted on them getting down & having something to eat. They said as they were about to charge the enemy they didn't have time, but finally said they would take a strong cup of coffee, & while they were drinking it the Yanks surrendered without any trouble. We had gone up into the garret to see the fight, but everything was very quiet. In the evening those two Rangers returned & ate supper with us. Lieut. Fort & AJG Robinson. When they got here not a servant was on the place, and we had to take their places until their return. The Yankee Provost Marshall was found hid between two feather beds, in Miss Corean's bed. The cover spread up & pillows upon it. It was at Mrs. Reeves' that he was captured. Mrs. Reeves & the girl treated our men shamefully. Said they didn't permit such ragged men to come to their house. Our men permitted Col. Parkhurst to go by and tell Josephine goodbye. Our men did better than the Yankees for they never allowed our boys to say goodbye to either mother or sister, much less sweetheart. They pressed Mrs. Reeves' carriage into service to take one of the wounded soldiers off, & when it was returned they cut up considerable, said they would never again ride in it. As if the Yankees had not time & again took our carriage, horses & everything else they could lay their hands on.
Monday July 14th 1862
        We can scarcely realize the joy of being free. Many expect the Yankees back today. Bettie & I sat up at Mrs. Duffer's last night, cam back & slept until nine, in the meantime having been waked up several times, which we did not relish one bit. Uncle John Lytle was in to see us. It has been a long, long time since I had seen him. Aunt Helen, her two daughters Bettie & Mollie, & Mrs. King were in to see us, but had to leave early for fear the Yanks would put out pickets. Sister Amanda & Mary Turner were here also & had to hurry off. Ma & Pa have been [away] from home all day, attending to wounded soldiers, principally Yankee ones. We had our rooms prepared for some of the wounded Confederates, but did not succeed in getting any to nurse. Mrs. John Burton was here a few moments this morning. A number of ladies went out to the battlefield, I should like to have seen it. I slept nearly all the afternoon, then got up & had our new horse attended to, the one the Rangers left with us.
Tuesday July 15th 1862
        It was clear until the middle of the day, then the clouds gathered & rained very hard. Cousin Ann, Bettie & I were up town today. B-- & I stopped to see Kate Marchbanks. Everybody seems so, so happy. We that are Southern in feelings sympathize in our troubles & share our joys. Kate will leave us for the mountains tomorrow, if nothing prevents her doing so. She insisted we should remain, & tell Mrs. Anderson goodbye, but she did not get back before we left. We stopped at Mrs. Boles' & they were as happy as we were, & had as much to tell us as Kate had. They said they heard a gentleman say he knew the negro that cursed us & he would have him shot. We then went around to Uncle Avent's, on our way Mrs. Brady hailed us & would have a talk with us. Cousins Tabitha & Ell were both around at their mother's, & had a bundle of news to tell. Capt. Rounds shot one of our men from the window at Mrs. Reeves', & he ran into Aunt's & told them who shot him. They told us how the Reeves girls did. I left Bettie there to return with her mother, & I came back alone. I saw Anna Murfree just as I passed Mrs. Henderson's, & we had quite a long talk. She said 4 Yankees had died up at Soule College since yesterday, and one was about to die. Said also they seem to be very grateful for the kindness of the ladies, but that those at the University were very ungrateful. It is rumored that Nashville has been taken by our men, & Clarksville has been attacked. If the first was true Bro. John would have been home by this time. Kate Avent is spending the night with Rosa. Last night 3 persons came up the pavement, rung the bell & we did not know at first who it was. Pa made them give their names before he let them in, for we were afraid they were Yankees, but they were after clothes to bury one of our men that had died.
Wednesday July 16th 1862
        Was up writing before breakfast. Ma & Pa were around to see our wounded soldiers that are scattered around town. We have lost several, & they say it is impossible for some of the rest to get well. Ma & Pa went up to see Uncle Ephe Lytle this afternoon, they report Aunt Judy is looking badly. 13 or 14 of our soldiers passed by here today. Took that Yankee storekeeper prisoner, that our boys made take the oath. It is reported that Gen. Cheatham is in five miles of Nashville, & going to attack it. The Yanks are fortifying it strongly. The 1st Regt. is with Cheatham & Legrand with it. Kate Avent returned home this morning. Old Mr. Fritz, that old Frenchman that staid a day or two out here, sent word for Ma to send for him, but neither Pa or Ma was here, or the buggy either and I was glad of it, as I don't want him here.
Thursday July 17th 1862
        I aroused earlier than usual, found it raining quite hard. A paroled Yankee took breakfast here this morning. He is from Bowling Green, Ky. & has been wanting Ma & Pa to help him desert & writing home to his brother not to join the army that they were not fighting for what they thought they were. His name was Holmes. Ma & Pa went up to see our wounded. At dinner another paroled Yankee came for his dinner, and as our boys had burnt up all their provisions, I felt it was a charity to give him something to eat, as he praised our boys. Said they even took their own provisions & gave to them, depriving themselves of something to eat. I afterwards found out he was an abolitionist, born in Boston, & now living in the West. He pretended to blame his Officers for surrendering. Everything he said only made me love Dixie, & the Southern boys more than ever. He said an unsophisticated country girl was out about 4 miles in the country sitting on a ten rail fence, hurrahing for Jeff Davis, said her mouth was large enough, but when she opened it, it reminded him of a coffee pot with the top open. He intended that as a witty remark, but I couldn't see the wit or the beauty, either. I did not enjoy the remark at all. If I had thought of it I would have given him another specimen, by making an ugly mouth at him. Old Mr. Fritz came here before dinner, & I don't know for how long. The Yankees came in town, did not stay long. I wonder if they have found afraid in their dictionary yet. Two flags of truce were in today, one from our men saying for the paroled Yankees to leave here, another from the Yankees to see about their sick & I must not forget a third that came in to hunt for their wagon. Some say he came in just to look around. Some think we will have a big battle here tomorrow, but I don't think so, or our men would not have sent word they would be in with 30,000 men.
Friday July 18th 1862
        I sometimes find myself writing before breakfast. No prospect of a fight. The day is clear & beautiful. Ma & Cousin Ann went up town this morning. Most everyone is very much frightened. Aunt Nancy Avent & Cousin Tabitha Morgan sent a good many of their things out here, expecting the town to be burned. The Yankees came in town just before dinner & stopped all traveling, even on the streets. Ma started the servant twice, but they didn't succeed in getting Pa's dinner to him. Ephe came out & said they were searching everybody's house for brooms & guns. Can't imagine what they want with brooms. They are concentrating their troops around the square, and as they are very wet (having rained quite hard), probably they want to exercise to keep from taking cold, or may be to keep us from cleaning up our boys any more. We saw about 12 or 14 coming, & I thought they were going to search our house too, so placed my little Southern flag in my bosom, for I had made it hoping to wave it at our dear boys as they would pass by. I hid Helen's flag also in the same place, a box of powder, & a number of union envelopes that I had as trophies. Marched up as if the place belonged to them, rung the bell with quite an air. Said they came to get horses & wagons. Ma said they should not have hers, that she would see Gen. Nelson about it. The officer said very impertinently come on boy's, we will go and see what she has got, & take them. Bettie & I heard them from our window [and] rushed downstairs into the yard, & went to where the horses were & gave them a piece of my mind. Rebuked them for running at Shiloh, Richmond, Bull's Run, &c., &c. he put on quite a bold air first but cooled down considerable before I got through. Bettie then came forward and gave them another cutting speech. Some of the privates enjoyed the way we treated the officer. One told me to ask him about running at Pittsburgh Landing. I really believe that although they were all in Yankee blue, some of them were good Southern men. One said he wished all my brothers might get home safely. That he never intended to kill our boys, if he could help it. They seem to have quite a contempt for that egotistical officer they had with them. They finally said, if we would lend the cart and one horse they would pledge their word it should be brought back. To our surprise it came back in an hour's time, all right. Ma had the buggy gotten up and went after Pa, as they would not let him come out home. They had several citizens arrested. Everybody advised her not to attempt going up in town but she did, saw one of the Officers and got Pa a permit to return home. Old Bill Spence, Ashburn, & Ned Jordan came in with the army. The citizens may expect a gay time now, as they are grand scoundrels. I wish I had known where old Ashburn was hid, I should have told on him. The Reeves, I understand, have been up since 5 o'clock, cheering the Yankees on. They ought to be run out of town after falling as low as they have. Mrs. Anderson & her sister Kate have not yet left town. Mrs. Lain was over here a few moments this evening.
Saturday July 19th 1862
        The Yankees allowed Pa to take something to eat to William Carney, who was put in the guard house yesterday for being drunk. A Mr. Baker, a union man whom they had arrested for the same cause, was out of his head & jumped from the 2nd story window, & killed himself. The Yanks issued a proclamation that everything that had been taken from the Yankee camps must be brought back, or they will be imprisoned. Andrew, one of our negro boys, got up bright & early & took back everything he and his mother had picked up after the left from the camps. They wanted to give the clothes back, but he would not take them. One time today it was reported the armies were fighting, but it was a mistake. Several Yankees came out & wanted to take our horses, but Pa would not let them. Two Yankees came up [and] asked for something to eat, said it was some time since they had eaten anything, had no money either to buy anything. Pa gave them food. Mr. Jobe was out here & told Ma good news from our army. The overseer of Uncle John Lytle's is spending the night here, although he has taken the oath he cannot get a pass to go out home. From what we hear, they will all have to take the oath again. Dr. Baskett has been arrested again, suspect Bill Spence is at the head of it. Ashburn told Mr. Wilkinson if he did not go out and show our men to him that were in Sunday, he would have him arrested.
Sunday July 20th 1862
        This morning the first thing I heard was many voices at once, & in finding out who they were, learned it was 9 Yankees that had come & ordered their breakfast. Only 7 seven remained, the other two thought it would be too long preparing, said if we didn't give them something to eat they would take every horse on the place. Pa was the only member of the family that went in where they were. They ate everything up, and the cook had to get a fresh supply Most of the left without even thanking Pa for his kindness. Scarcely had they gone, when two more scamps said, they had orders to take every horse they saw. Pa & Ma went out [and] talked quite plain to them, said they should not have them until a written order was shown. One of them told Ma if she were a man he would whip her, but they did not get the horses. Quite a number were here before dinner, & 5 more took that meal here. 4 more came, 2 remaining at the ice house, & the other two came to the house. One little fellow had the bridle & was going to take him whether or not & when Pa pretended he had a guard here, he left in a hurry, made the remark on leaving they would have them yet even were they to have to get armed men to come with them. So Ma started up town after a guard, as the Provost Marshall said in the morning she might have one, but when she went said so many had applied for guards he could not furnish one, but if she would apply to the Col. of cavalry she could get one. Ma thinking Gen. Nelson might give her one, sent in her name, stated her business, & an officer was treating her very politely, just starting over after a guard, when old Ashburn slipped into the Gen.'s room, and I suppose he must have told the Gen. something, for he had him immediately recalled, sent Ma a very insulting message for she & Pa to go home & stay there,& not to show their faces any more, if they didn't want to be eaten out of house and home. Ma said she didn't care about their eating, for she had been feeding them all day. We didn't know what to do, but in a few moments a Yankee came out, enquired very particularly into the case, & sent Lt. H. H. Fisk to guard us accompanied by himself. Said they would stay tonight, didn't know whether or not they would stay longer. Bettie & I neither went into supper, I dislike very much to eat at the table with the Yankees.
Monday July 21st 1862
        This morning Bettie & I neither went to the table where they were, but while we sat eating two Yankees came twice after our horses, & twice the guards went out after them, & came near shooting them, thereby preventing them taking either Pa's or our horses. Then Bettie & I spoke to them. One is named Charley Leisure, & the other Lt. H.R. Fisk. So far they seem to be very polite & spunky kind of fellows. Mrs. Lain came over a few moments this morning. Brother John came, Bettie & I were upstairs sewing, but we rushed frantically down giving him a big kiss before them. Mrs. Burton & two children came to hear from Mr. John Burton, who is in prison in Nashville. A Lt. Vail called on Ma to see about his men disturbing us, but thinks really it was just to get acquainted with the family. He was dressed up quite handsomely, but none of us made our appearance. He made his stay until after dinner, said he was ordered off on a scouting expedition at two o'clock. Bro. John left before Bettie & I finished our dinner so didn't have an opportunity of asking his opinion about Pa's friend Mr. Riddell. This evening Bettie & I went up town to see Kate Marchbanks. She and Mrs. Anderson both seemed glad to see us, had many things to tell us especially about the Yankees. The day they got our horse & cart, they got their horse, that Mr. Anderson had only purchased a day or two before, & turned it loose, & they had not since found him. It is a wonder they returned ours so soon, & in a fine condition as they found him. If we had not blazed away so terrible at them, I don't think they would [have]. Mrs. Anderson is unfortunate about losing horses. Kate took us down to see a wounded Confederate at Mrs. Hicks'. He is from Ga. & his name is Smith. The room was filled with ladies. I wish he could be brought out here. That house is so warm & cramped up. While they were all engaged in conversation Mary Matilda (or Maud Florence as she terms herself) came over [and began] a conversation as if by chance. I asked her about her sweetheart, whom she is engaged, a Morgan man. I asked his given name, & his place of residence, & I haven't the least doubt that our friend Mr. Riddell's brother Charley & Mary Matilda's beaux are one & the same fellow. I hope persons won't find it out & will forget we went calling with him & entertained him in our house. Gordon Reeves received a letter from Capt. Rounds, by the paroled soldiers. A married man, too. A Texan took him up behind him until he got out of town, then put him on a little mule, but on his way out stopped and told Mr. Beard how he was captured between two feather beds. It must have been very mortifying to get to hear such a reflection on his bravery. He made many beautiful promises, if they would only parole him [he would] go home & stay there. Gen. Nelson said if Capt. Rounds had not been so taken up with his wives, Murfreesboro never would have been taken. He says if he hears of one of his men going to see a woman in this town, he will have them shot. I suppose he means to get in one of his "tantrums". He drove all Mrs. Hagan's boarders off, & when she threatened to leave also ordered her to get some mush and milk quick for his dinner or else she would see him in one of his "tantrums". He is the old chap that threatened to cut a girls throat if she did not let him call upon her. Mrs. Hagan replied she could furnish mush, but milk she could not, she had none in the house, & no one to send after any. Suppose he pressed some poor cow into service like he did chickens & turkeys, which is vile for a private but how much worse for a Genl. Although a large body, I fear it is inhabited by a very small soul. When Mrs. James went for a pass to go home & look after some of her horses that had been stolen representing her case, said she was a widow. He said go & get married, & then "said you had better marry me" A grand old scamp. Kate walked a short distance, & while we stopped to talk a short spell with Mrs. Anderson, a Yankee officer rode up, pretending to fix his boot but evidently trying to hear what we had to say. We passed on, & he came very near riding over us. We came down to Mrs. Crichlow's house, had to knock some time ere we were admitted, as she was on the other side of the house talking to two Yanks. They said they had marching orders for 5 o'clock in the morning. Several Regts. have passed through today. It is the impression that the Yanks are retreating from the South. Our army is supposed enrout for Ky. It is Buell's army that is passing through. Some say Nelson just came to protect the retreating army. I don't think from appearance they are going to tarry long. I don't trust the negroes now. They have too much of the Yankees about them to suit me. John Morgan is up in Indiana & has captured a little town there. He has cut off communication between Louisville, Ky. and Nashville. When Forrest was here the Yankee troops were cut off at Wartrace from those in Nashville, & had to live on half food. They said they were glad enough to get back to get something to eat. I hope our boys will capture them all yet. When we got home, found they had eaten supper earlier than usual, as our guards had orders to leave, which we regret on account of the protection they afforded us. Bettie & I haven't eaten with them yet, but thought as they were so kind to us we would, but had not. They were from Penn. One was from Philadelphia & knew the place I attended school. Mr. Rutledge got a pass & went home. Brother Will was released today & was out here when we returned. While they were expecting a battle one of the men that was taken prisoner made his escape. He had been so badly frightened by the Yankees he mind was effected. I hope he will recover. We heard after Ma was treated so badly by old Nelson Sunday, he heard how kind Ma had been to his wounded men & he cursed old Ashburn to everything good & bad, & ordered her a guard. Sue Brady & Ell Childress were out to see us, also Lookie Duffer, while we were away. Ell & Sue were telling about how old Nelson did them. He said quite rough. He told Mrs. Tom Johnson he would give her a pass once and for all, [but] she must pack up & leave this country, [&] that he heard what a "sesesh" she was.
Tuesday July 22nd 1862
        This morning early our guards came over a few moments to tell Pa goodbye, while they were here a Yankee came & said he was going to have a horse whether or not but the guards prevented him taking it, & after he left they gave Pa a protection for his property then bid him goodbye, & soon the cavalry were marching away from Murfreesboro. I hope soon to see the place cleared of the last one of them. I can see the spirits of the servants are ebbing low since the Yankees are pushing along while they keep moving from this direction. William took dinner here, but I did not see him. Cousin Ann spent the day up town. A flag of truce from our men came this afternoon, some say the purported purpose is to exchange prisoners, & others say it was for the Yankees to surrender. Our messenger had not been replied to yet, as I understand. Mr. John Kirk & Uncle Tommy came in to see about an order that was sent out to send in hands to fortify the town. Now their negroes are in Mississippi so they could not comply. After promising to give them passes to return, [&] refused to do so. They are both staying with us tonight. It seems strange, some men they call upon & others they do not. I have my suspicions about those they don't call upon. Old Genl. Nelson left bag & baggage this morning. Many think it is a trap to catch Forrest. I hope they will not be successful, if that's their object. I understand they have canons planted all around the square. Old Mr. Fritz was quite sick & sent for a Dr., but couldn't get a single one. About 2 o'clock in the night we heard troops going out of town, at first we thought it best to dress, but changed our minds and slept soundly until day.
Wednesday July 23rd 1862
        Nearly all Yankees have left town this morning. Mr. Lillard called by, & told Uncle Tommy to hurry & go home, as they had pickets out on only a few roads. So just as soon as they had breakfasted, Uncle Tommy & Mr. Kirk & brother Will left for home. Cousin Ann & Rosa were up town & on coming home brought good news. That Forrest had captured Genl. Nelson & command, that he had torn up the railroad from Smyrna to Nashville, burning the depot there, that he had dashed through Nashville, killing many Yankees & was now hastily crossing the river. It is believed that Genl. Beaureguarde is in Ky. I was astonished to hear of Aunt Nancy Avent defending Maj. Maney for protecting old Ashburn, for he is as mean as old Bill Spence. That rascal was nearly frightened out of his wits yesterday when the flag of truce came in, & is now selling off at cost, preparing to leave here. I hope our boys will have a chance at him yet. This evening Bettie & I put our sewing by & walked over to Mrs. Lain's, & while there saw Yankees returning into town, which we were sorry to see proved to be old Nelson & his command. Not less than 10,000 came in. We watched them until too dark to see them, then we could hear them coming, still coming. They were very much jaded & evidently worn out, could scarcely drag one foot before the other. The ebony images were overjoyed to see them return. While at supper one Yankee came to [buy] bread, but Pa said he had none to sell, but asked him into supper. I finished mine in a hurry & left the table. He thanked Pa when he was through, said they were in 4 miles of Nashville. Our men had destroyed the bridge, captured a number of their men, but they came upon the rear of our army retaking their men, and two of ours. Said we killed 10 of their men in the fight. The Yankee said our army did not have the cross roads down below here until 2 o'clock today. One of our old guards returned and came out tonight, was quite glad, as the Yankees are tired & hungry, & they may take it into their heads to do any mischief tonight being so disappointed. Old Nelson, I suppose, is in one of his tantrums, & will make all Mrs. Hagan's boarders leave once again, as they returned to her house today. Our flag of truce came in on the Lebanon pike, & went out on the Woodberry pike, supposed to puzzle the Yankees. The Yankees would not let the man with the flag see Maj. Saunders (a wounded confederate at Maj. Ledbetter's). The flag that came in Sunday I understand was to see about exchange of prisoners. Col. Saunders, for a Col. our men had captured over at Lebanon. A dead body came in today, supposed to be one of their officers.
Thursday July 24th 1862
        It was a mistake about it being an officer, it was a lady that had died in the Asylum near Nashville, & her husband was taking her remains home to Ala. I never saw the two Yankees that took breakfast here, neither did I eat with our guard at dinner. Old Nelson says all can pass through the pickets except Confederate soldiers. He has granted permission to open all stores & sell goods if they wish. Someone applied to him to give a negro ball, but he said he did not come here for that purpose & that he was not going to let his soldiers have sweethearts in town. One of the guards said old Nelson beat one of his soldiers over the head several times on the march because he was asleep & didn't get out of his way soon enough, & because a Lieut. didn't come as soon as he thought he ought to have done so ordered his arrest, & if he resisted he was to be shot. I'm sure our boys would not stand such treatment as that. It was true about Forrest going into Nashville yesterday, I am very sorry. I hope he will yet possess Nashville.
Friday morning
        This morning our guards came back, only a few moments however, then left just after I had finished dinner. Pa went to the farm today, came back quite sick, but is better tonight. Bettie & I went up to tell Kate Marchbanks goodbye, as she is going to leave in the morning, expects to be gone 2 months. She went up to Mrs. Crockett's to see our sick soldiers with us, and then stopped at Mrs. Hicks' to see Mr. Smith, then at Mrs. Henderson's corner told Kate goodbye. Saw Capt. Frost & he insisted on our going in to see his wife who is quite ill, & we stopped a few moments. Now for the rumors & reports. In the first place, Gen. Nelson is to leave here for Louisville Ky. He has gone out this afternoon to hunt Forrest & it is reported that Forrest has killed quite a number of Yankees, & took many prisoners. I heard that old Washburn wanted to have Dr. King arrested, but Genl. Nelson cursed him & would not do it. He seems to have little confidence in these Union men. The Reeves were quite angry for taking their cow sent for the guard, but it did not come to their assistance. One of them went up to tell the Genl. about it, but she received poor comfort, especially when she mentioned Rounds & Parkhurst.
Saturday July 26th 1862
        Mrs. Tom Johnson was arrested. Nelson says she is a spy, because she come into town so often. She is at Mrs. Wendle's with a guard. The Yankees still keep tramping down the pike.
Sunday July 27th 1862
        The Yanks expected an attack last night, were in battle array all night before our house, this morning 3 of them came over and got their breakfast. The two guards and another. They seemed quite freted with Genl. Nelson, for keeping them on horseback all night & then sent word to feed their horses & themselves by 8 o'clock, & not a mouthful did they have for either horse or themselves. They left before Bettie & I went down to breakfast & as usual the Yankees left and marched down the pike. This morning Mr. John Burton & Mr. Peter Duffer came out to see Pa a little while. Mr. B-- had just returned from Nashville on parole. Kate Avent came home with Rosa & is spending the night. They brought the news of Uncle Ephraim's arrest. He should have gone back ere this to our Southern army, for we need every man. Ma, Cousin Ann, & Ephe went out to Uncle Tom Turner's this evening, when they returned heard of Uncle Ephe's arrest & went to see him. William Tilford & his two nephews are in prison also. Aunt Judy & Kate are spending the night here. The canons were fired in upon, & quite a disturbance was made. The canons placed upon the square & troops rushing up and down furiously. We expected an attack every minute, but about 11 o'clock I became so sleepy I had to retire. I am twenty years old today, getting quite ancient.
Monday July 28th 1862
        Aunt Judy & Kate left early this morning. Ma was up to the prison, & sent the prisoners something to eat. Kate Avent went home this evening. Bettie & I paid several pleasant visits this morning. One on Miss Saunders of Ala., who is at Col. Ledbetter's with her father who is wounded there, from there went to Pa's store then to Dr. Robt. Wendle's, from there to Mrs. Jno. A. Crockett's to see a wounded soldier, a Texas Ranger who seems to be quite a nice fellow, so far as I can judge. Kate Marchbanks came out and is spending the night. Mr. & Mrs. Anderson brought her in their buggy. While we were standing out on the porch a Yankee walked up, bowed, & asked if we were the ladies of the house. I replied no, she was out at the gate. Ma came in & he introduced himself as Genl. Hanson, came to enquire what Ma knew about the household things that Mrs. Champ had torn up by the Yankees. When Ma got through, said he would allow Mrs. Champ $300 to be collected some time, which I expect means never. I have no confidence in any of them. Ma says he seems very polite, & he is the same one that Aunt Judy Lytle was making such a fuss about being so polite at her house. He left before supper. Our two guards & two others came here to supper with us.
Tuesday morning July 29th 62
        Kate Marchbanks left soon after breakfast. Ma went up & took one of our prisoners some clothes & each men sent provisions to them. Will Tilford & nephews were released to day, also Mrs. Tom Johnson. Ma was to see our sick soldiers at Mrs. Arnold's today. Bro. John was in & took dinner with us. Ma says he does not fancy Wm. Riddell much. Kate Marchbanks leaves tomorrow. Old Mr. Fritz is quite sick tonight.
Wednesday morning July 30th 62
        Soldiers were both going & coming today. Nothing of interest especially. The soldiers annoy us a great deal by their stealing in the garden. I understand the Yankees that went to McMinnville are on their way back without accomplishing anything. We haven't heard the result from Tulahoma yet. I hope our men were victorious. I heard that the Confederates had burnt Genl. Mitchell's cotton at some little town & took three hundred prisoners. Ma & Cousin Ann went up town this afternoon. Bettie & I made a beautiful bouquet, & sent [it to] our sick soldier at Mrs. Crockett's. Sent us word he was not so well today, talked too much yesterday. I'm glad Bettie & I did not call there Monday morning, as we always have so much to say. Old Mr. Fritz is some better today. Uncle Ephe was taken to Nashville this evening.
Thursday morning July 31st 62
        It has been raining the greater part of the day. Aunt Judy Lytle, Mary, Willie, & Shoudie Richardson took dinner with us, also Mr. Jobe. He seems to be a good rebel although he has taken the oath. He says the Yankee deserters are constantly coming in through the country. It is reported 7 thousand more men are coming in tonight, but many will leave tomorrow. I wish all were going off.