Saturday June 1st 1861
        A lovely day. Sister returned the carriage after me early this morning and I went home, found Bro. Wilson already gone to town. In the afternoon returned bringing me a letter from Pa. He spoke of the company's leaving, & that the county had promised more. He sent Bro. Wilson several Nashville papers. He and Ma were disappointed in our not coming up sooner this summer. Mr. Miller said he was coming down Monday. Would like to see him, but everything is packed up for us to leave. I have nearly finished packing my trunk. Wish he hadn't told Bro. Wilson.
Sunday June 2nd 1861
        Rather too warm. Lovely over head. The Hope threw us a paper off, containing very little news. This afternoon Mrs. Barksdale, Willie, Jennie, Josephine, Mrs. Paul, & Sallie, her daughter came up to tell us goodbye. Mr. Wm. Wheeles was also here a few moments. After they left Dr. Wilson, Sister, & myself walked to the river.
Monday June 3rd 1861
        Twice it sprinkled just the least little bit. Sister & Dr. Wilson went up to the Quarter. Mr. Miller did not come today. Mr. Jim Brookes called on Bro. Wilson, but he was not at home consequently would not come in. it rained some this evening, but not enough for the crops, as they are needing it badly. Sister, Bro. Wilson & I went down and told all goodbye at Mrs. Fred Wheeles'. Saw a Mrs. Bunch, sister of Mrs. Wheeles as we came back, met Miss Mary Whitehead & Mrs. Roberts on horseback going down to Mrs. Fred Wheeles, as we stopped at Mrs. Wm. Wheeles', they returned there after we left. Everybody seems to be very sorry we are going to leave, tried to make me promise to return next winter. Could scarcely keep from crying when I told old Mr. & Mrs. Wheeles goodbye, for I hardly expect ever to see them again. In fact, I doubt whether I ever see any of my friends here again.
Tuesday June 4th 1861
        A lovely day. Been busy finishing the life of Aaron Burr, by Parton, which proved to be interesting. This morning Mr. Miller came. I did not go in the parlor until Messrs Paul & Barksdale came. They did not remain a great while. We had such a splendid dinner, told Sister Mary was sorry she did not insist on the gentlemen staying. Miss Mary Whitehead, Mrs. Roberts, & Mr. & Mrs. Wm. Gale were here to see and tell us good bye. Quite a number of the darkies from the Quarter came to tell us good bye. Started home tonight.
June 5th 1861
        It rained some this evening. We got off the boat not long after breakfast, & went to the Hotel & went shopping. Left just after dinner. I did not feel very well today. Took the cars at this place Vicksburg. Got off at Canton to get our supper, & Bro. Wilson being so busy getting our tickets & checks didn't get his supper. We were very much afraid we would be left. That night Miss Caldwell got on at Shonugota, & seems to be a very pleasant nice young lady. She is going up to Nashville under Bro. Wilson's care. Did not get much sleep until nearly day. Mr. Joe Avent also got on the train, & a Mrs. Peal, wife of a man that once oversaw for Uncle Tom Turner.
June 7th 1861
        Felt better than I expected after traveling all night. Passed Corinth, did not see a single person I knew. Sister saw a young man on the train she knew from Yazoo City, a Mr. Nigh. There was a gentleman accompanying an elderly lady on the train, I thought it must be mother & son. He was very polite to us. Took supper at Huntsville, Ala. We will travel all night, will reach home tomorrow, won't I be glad to be home once more.
June 8th 1861
        This morning arrived in Murfreesboro early, found Pa & the Carriage awaiting us at the depot.
Friday 9th 1861
        This morning it did not rain but until about 7 o'clock this evening, & we had quite a storm. It is still raining, & it is now about 10 o'clock. I am sleeping down with Ma tonight. Pa, getting too late over at the depot, was left this morning, but went down tonight. The Misses Murfree & Burton came out begging for soldiers. Poor fellows I don't know how any one could refuse them aid. The boxes are to be sent on to Virginia next Tuesday. Ma is going to give them some blankets & pillows, make some salve, & send some rags & lint. I feel sad, for somehow I can't help thinking the first Regt has been in an engagement in West Virginia. I could write many pages about our war & brave soldiers. Sister Maria came in after Bro. Will this morning, took him back home. He came in yesterday, & had quite a hard chill & was very sick, went back to Mrs. Butler's. Miss Sallie Jetton & Potterfield called this evening.