March 3rd
        I was much gratified last Saturday in receiving letters from Mary Virginia, George and Willie, they were well. I feel thankful to my Heavenly Father for blessing my dear children, my daughter writes that she cannot come and I cannot go to her, as the Yankees are getting the R. Roads, travelling is not as safe as it was. I long to be with my daughter as she expects to be confined this month, it is a great trial to me that I cannot go. I have looked to the Lord for comfort, I have committed her into the hands of God, and I believe he will bless her.
        I went to Union yesterday to hear brother Pepper preach, 'twas an excellent sermon, had a good congregation. After sermon he held class meeting, 'twas a good meeting, I enjoyed it, my soul was happy. I was enabled to tell what the Lord had done for my soul. Brother Pepper is doing his duty, he is a devoted child of God. I feel like there will be a revival on his circuit, the Lord will bless his labors.
March 10th
        I have heard of the death of aunt Martha Courts, she died in the faith, has gone home to Jesus Christ.
        This is a very gloomy time, we are daily expecting another terrible battle near Suffolk, it makes my heart sad to think of the time when my sons will march to the battle field and be exposed to the balls and fire of the Enemy, but I have prayed to God to cover their heads in the day of battle, and that their lives may be spared if it is his will, if it should be God's will for them to fall on the battle field, I hope he will send his angel to comfort them and help them, and if they die, to bear their souls to Heaven. Oh! this is a dark and trying time. Mary Virginia my daughter expects to be confined in a few days. I know she feels sad as the Yankees are not very far from where she is but I believe God will take care of her, she is safe and will do well. I have more fears for my sons who are exposed to the dangers of war. Lord, increase my faith for my children. I do believe if either of them die from wounds received in the battle, God for Christ sake will forgive their sins and take them home to Heaven. Thank God for giving me such faith. My neighbors are all in distress, their sons are going to the army in a few days. Green Daniel, Charly, and Archy Watkins have volunteered to go. I believe every young man is going except a few.
        I think every Christian should fast and pray. The South will be over-run by the enemy, so it is thought by a good many. An awful time is before us. Oh! Lord have mercy upon us.
March 10th
        We are having some pretty weather now. A poor woman came here yesterday, she wanted some things for her husband, as he was going to start to the army on Thursday, he is a soldier. I had the pleasure of giving her something for him. I sent him a Testament to read, sent him word to put his trust in God. I gave her some advice, and exhorted her to seek religion.
        I feel cheerful and happy today, in trying to help the poor and needy I got blessed and comforted myself, my gloom and fears are all gone.
        The Lord always blesses me when I try to keep his commandments. I sent two Testaments to the Soldiers this morning to take with them when they go to the army, I have two more that I wish to give away to the Soldiers. Green Daniel has volunteered and expects to start on Thursday the 13th of this month, also Archy Watkins and Charly Watkins, and nearly every young man of this neighborhood.
March 25
        The weather is cold and unpleasant, last Sunday I had the privilege of going to see a dying Christian, Cousin Fanny Price. I felt comforted to see her patience and resignation under her severe sufferings, she says she has four diseases, fistula, disease of the womb, stomach and throat, it has done me good to hear her talk. I was convinced that it was a glorious scene to see a Christian die, in the triumphs of the faith. My soul is happy I can praise God for his goodness to me, I feel that I am on my way to heaven.