April 2nd
        My husband returned home safe on Monday the 25 of March after an absence of six weeks, he looked a great deal better, had fattened some, he went from Memphis to Louisiana with his brother P. I feel very thankful for his safe return home, I had a trying time while he was gone. Abi is sick, Susan scalded her ankle dreadful, looked like it would mortify. I was miserable about it. My little Anna was sick most a week and Willie was kicked by a horse, we all thought he might die. I was very much cast down as my husband was not at home to help bear the burden, but the Lord was with me to comfort and support me in these trying times. I was sorely tempted nearly all last week, my soul was surrounded by darkness, doubts and gloomy fears, it seemed like the Lord had forsaken me.
        I wept and prayed to Jesus Christ to remove my burden of fears, and gloom, he heard and answered, last Sunday evening he blessed my soul. These words came forcibly to mind, "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly from temptation." Just then light broke into my soul, I could praise my precious Saviour, because he heard and answered me, and gave me peace and comfort. Hallelujah! The Lord God omnipotent reigneth!!!
        I will trust him in every extremity.


April 29th
        Since I wrote a change has taken place. Civil War has begun, a bloody affair at Baltimore on the 19th, South Carolina took Fort Sumpter, and several men killed on the enemy's side.
        The slavery question is the cause of all this trouble, 8 Southern states have seceded from the Union, if the North and South can't agree, they had better separate. Abraham Lincoln the President is opposed to the institution of slavery, he don't seem disposed to make any compromise with the South. The Southern people are raising a large army to defend their Country and their rights. Nearly all the young men of our Country have volunteered to go into the army. My dear son Willie is a volunteer, and if necessary will go to aid in fighting for his country. I expect my son George will go too, it makes tears flow from my eyes to think of it, but I shall commit them to my kind Saviour, I hope and trust in God that they will get back home from the battle field, but if they should fall, I hope that God will forgive them and take them to Heaven for Jesus sake who died for them. I feel very solemn today thinking about the war, I hope God will give me grace to bear all the trials that are coming upon me, it is my fervent prayer that God will convert all of my children, and take them to Heaven when they die. Oh Lord have mercy upon us all.