August 3
        Last Friday I went to Union to hear brother Pepper preach, his text was "By the Grace of God I am what I am," it was a good sermon. I heard and enjoyed it, 'twas a time of refreshing to my soul.
        I received a letter from my son Willie, he was well, wrote that he would get home tomorrow, I have not seen him in near 15 months, since he joined the army.
        I am looking for my husband home, been gone 12 days, I am anxious to see him at home. I can't hear anything from my dear daughter and her family, but I commit her and her family into the hands of my God.
August 6th
        My dear soldier boy Willie got home safe last night at 1 o'clock. I do thank and praise my God for bringing him home, he is in good health, looks well, while thousands of soldiers have died, some from disease, some by the enemy, my dear boy's life has been preserved by my Heavenly Father. Glory! and Honor! and praise, and might be ascribed unto Jesus Christ.
        My husband got home day before yesterday, had a prosperous trip, he bought a large supply of salt.
August 10th
        This is a beautiful day, but very warm. I went to Union today to hear brother Waynick, he done well, preached a good sermon. I felt cheerful and happy today, the Lord is good I will praise him with joyful lips, my soul is happy.
August 21
        We are all well except one negro child. Virginia's birth day, I can't hear one word from her. I pray that God may bless her and family, make them happy christians. I expect the Yankees have driven her away from her home, I hope these troubles will be worked out for her a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
        My dear Willie is at home, well and hearty. I received a letter from my dear George, he was well, he was in the army near Kinston, N. C. I pray that God may save his life, and make him a christian. I feel today that the anxiety, cares and troubles of this life weigh me down. I have been cast down, I have many trials, but I will look to the Lord, he is my only help.