July 2nd
        Mr. Dickens our overseer starts to the army today, he has volunteered, he leaves a wife and 1 child behind. I hope God will bless him and bring him back to his family.
July 12th
        I returned home yesterday from the Parsonage at Wentworth, I spent a day and two nights with Sister and Brother Bruton, our minister. Our time passed off pleasantly. Brother Fletcher Reid came to see us while there, he is one of my favorites. I felt it to be a privilege and an honor to be with God's ministers, and hear them talk. Bro. Reid spoke fluently about the war, he comforted me by his conversation.
        I hope God will be with our armies, and be on our side. Brother Reid sympathized with me in giving up my dear boys to go to the army, he encouraged me to trust in God, and commit them to God. I was greatly comforted by his conversation, my soul thrilled with tender emotions of love and joy. I thank God for comforting me through dear Brother Reid. I love him because he is an humble Christian, and because he spoke words of comfort to my soul.
        Oh! 'tis a privilege and an honor to be a child of God, to be an heir of a crown, incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away.
        My soul is happy this evening, Oh magnify the Lord with me and let us exalt his name together, he has delivered me from temptation. I want an increase of love and faith.
July 16
        I have heard of the death of Cousin Susan Jeffreys, she died of consumption at Doctor Williamson's, this should be a warning to us all to prepare to meet God. She went to the Alum Springs in Virginia in March 1860, in company with Adi McCain who was scrofulus. Cousin Susan kept pretty well until she took the measles in the month of July, after having been at the Springs 4 months, she was very gay before she was taken sick, attended the balls and partys and danced. She was a member of the Methodist church, but the Lord reproved her for her worldly mindness, she died in twelve months from that time she took measles. I expect to hear the particulars of her death soon.