January 1st 1862
        New Year's day. And I live to see another year, I have had some trials last year, my two sons George and Willie left me for the war. They joined the army for twelve months, but the Lord has been with them, and gave them excellent health and every comfort, while many poor soldiers have sickened and died, my sons have been spared to enjoy good health. I had another trial last year. My dear Daughter Mrs. Williamson left us for Arkansa, her new home, she left here in Feb. but the Lord has been with her and blessed her and family, she and all the family nearly have had chills, but no deaths except old Wlijah an old man. I expect my daughter to see me in Feb. I pray that God may enable her to come to my arms.
        The Lord has been very good to me the past year, I have had good health, and all my children and servants have had good health, and I have enjoyed myself at times, had some refreshing seasons for the Lord. I will praise the Lord for his goodness to me and my family, I will now, on this new years day renew my covenant with God my Saviour. I give myself to him, and pray that I may spend this year to his honor and glory, and that I may live to be useful and happy!!
January 8th
        We are having some cold weather now, I often think of the Soldiers, some of them in cloth tents. I hope and pray that God may bless them, and that we may soon have peace restored to our unhappy Country, war is a dreadful calamity, but it will all work out for good to our country.
        I have commenced again to read the Bible regularly through, I read 4 chapters every day, I have set times for private prayer, it is a privilege which I enjoy, I believe that God has commenced to sanctify my soul. I feel that the glory of God shines in my soul and on my road.
January 27
        We went to Union yesterday to hear Mr. Macneely preach, he is an old Baptist, he is a revivalist, a warm preacher, there was some feeling in the congregation. We are having some cold and disagreeable weather now, the ground was white with snow last Friday.
        There was a bloody battle in Kentucky on the 19th of this month, the North got the victory, the South lost 500 killed and wounded, so the paper states. I pity the wounded soldiers, and the wives, Mothers and Sisters that lost dear ones in the battle. Surely God is judging his people, everyone ought to humble themselves in sackcloth and ashes, and fast, and pray to God to spare us, and save us from war and bloodshed.