December 6th
        My husband returned from Arkansa last Tuesday, he left Mr. W. and my daughter tolerable well, they expect to visit me in a few weeks, thanks to our heavenly Father for so many mercies.
        I have just received letters from my two sons in the army, they were both well and hearty, I thank God for his goodness to my sons, they have not been in a battle yet. Our country is gloomy and still threatened with another bloody battle, our sea coast is blockaded by the Enemy.
        We cannot get any coffee without giving a very high price, salt is very scarce and high price, if the War continues much longer it will be a gloomy state of things, I'm afraid the poor will suffer this winter.
Dec. 16th
        We went to Carmel yesterday, and heard brother Bruton preach from this text "If we confess our sins God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness."
        We have a new preacher, Brother Pepper, I have heard him, he is an excellent preacher, a pious and devoted Christian. The circuit has been divided, the River is the dividing line, about seven appointments on each circuit, brother Bruton is in charge of one half of this circuit, he will live in Madison, Brother Pepper the other half.
Dec. 23rd
        I went to Carmel yesterday, Brother Reid preached from this text, "If we regard iniquity in our hearts, God will not hear our prayers," it was an excellent sermon, it proved a blessing to my soul, it was a very cold day and I hesitated about going because my hearing was bad but I heard enough of the sermon to do me good. I thank God that I went, soon as I came home I went off to pray. I felt a desire to be made pure and holy. I had a remarkable dream, waked up feeling happy, and I still feel happy. I have the witness of the spirit, I know that I am a child of God, and on my way to Heaven. I will praise God as long as I live, for the Lord God is my sun and shield, he will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.
December 25
        This is Christmas day, a beautiful day but very cold, how different this Christmas from last, now our Country is filled with armies to defend our country from the Northern army, many bloody battles have been fought, hundreds have been killed on both sides, and a great many soldiers have died in the camp from disease and want of attention while sick, it is sad to contemplate, perhaps the Lord is chastising his church, I believe he permits it for our good.
        I have two sons in the army, they have enjoyed fine health, the Lord has blessed them, I thank and praise him for it. I hope and pray that they may get home safe to my arms.
        I have enjoyed peace of mind and heart for a month, the Lord has comforted me, I feel happy in Jesus.