August 4th
        I will now record something of the great Battle that was fought at Stone bridge near Manassas junction on the 21st of July 1861. Both of the armies were large, the enemys had twice as many as we had, they began the contest early in the morning and continued until sundown, for several hours it seemed that the enemy would overcome us. About 3 o'clock 4 regiments of Kirby Smith from Winchester came to our assistance, and then the scene was changed in our favor. After a hard contest the enemy retreated and we pursued them to Centerville, in their haste they left a million of dollars worth of property, guns, ammunition, Sherman's splendid battery, which was the best of all, and many valuables.
        The enemy lost 5000 killed and wounded, our loss was 2500 killed and wounded. We should praise God for giving us the victory, for his unseen hand did save us, from our enemys.
August 22
        I returned from our meeting at Carmel last Tuesday, it lasted only three days, cloudy and rainy weather hindered some. Brother Bruton preached some good sermons. Mr. Denny preached on Monday at 3 o'clock from the text "God is love," it was a good sermon. Bro. Winnick preached twice, I think he will make a good preacher.
        We had good congregations considering the rain and the war, there was one mourner, Mrs. Dickens, our overseer's wife, she says she feels better satisfyed. I enjoyed myself, it was a profitable time to my soul. I felt built up and edifyed in the most holy faith, I feel determined to press forward, though I expect to meet with some difficultys and trials on the way, but God's grace is sufficient for me, and in that will I trust.
        I hear from my two soldiers occasionally, they were both in fine health, and camped at a very pleasant place, have plenty to eat and a delightful spring to drink from. Thank God for all these blessings to my boys. I will praise God for his goodness to them. I am very anxious to hear from my dear daughter in Arkansa it has proved several weeks since I heard from her.
Aug. 27th
        For the past week I have been cast down with temptations, my spiritual sky was clouded. The Lord's face was hid from me, I seemed to be left in the darkness, but I continued to pray, and ask God to remove the temptation and comfort my soul. I searched the scriptures, for I know there are many sweet and precious promises to those who put their trust in God. I have been examining myself, I find that I do believe in God. I commit my soul and body into his hands.