June 11th
        This is very cool weather now, we sit by the fire, the 4th of this month the river was very high, the low grounds were covered with water, all the corn, wheat, and oats were under water.
        There has been another battle near Richmond, but my dear Willie was not hurt, he was not in the fight. I hope the Lord will bring him home in good health, if he lives I expect him home the 16th of July. I feel that the Lord is good to me and mine, glory to his name forever.
        I feel cheerful and thankful to my Saviour.
June 14th
        We are having some beautiful weather now, we are all well at home, day before yesterday I heard that my dear Willie was sick in the army. Dr. McCain saw him at the camp 2 miles of Richmond, I felt very sad when I heard it, he is sick with diarhea, and a very poor diet. Mr. Bethell has gone to Danville to hear from him by Telegraph, if he is seriously sick Mr. Bethell will go to see him, and if possible bring him home. I feel so sorry for him, he has a hard time of it, but I look to the Lord and pray to him to take care of dear Willie and bring him safely home. I pray that God may save his life and keep him from being killed.
        We received a letter from dear George, he was well, he is drilling the Soldiers in Raleigh.
        We have not heard from our daughter Mary Virginia in several weeks, I hope she will come to N. Carolina and spend the summer.
June 15
        This is a hot, sultry day, bright sunshine, just what we need. My dear Father died just 14 years ago this day, the 15th of June 1848. He rests in Jesus.
        I have been very uneasy about dear Willie because he was sick in the army. Dr. John Williamson is just from there, he says that Willie is well, thanks and praise to our God.
June 17
        I feel sad today, as I spoke too hastily, I am sorry for it, how important that we should be slow to speak, slow to wrath.
June 18th
        I feel cheerful and happy today. God has forgiven me, I have peace and comfort in Jesus. My husband starts to Richmond tomorrow to see our dear Willie, who is in the army two miles from there. I expect Willie home if God permits, the 16th of July. I saw in the newspaper that the Federals had taken Memphis, after a fight and some bloodshed. Mr. Williamson lives near Memphis, I would be glad for him to bring Mary Virginia here to stay until the war closes. I know they feel uneasy, but I pray that God may take care of them and shield them from all harm.
June 20th
        I have just received a letter from my daughter in Arkansa, she was tolerable well, Mr. Williamson was having chills. She has a son born 14th of April, named him Willie Bethell. I feel so sad about my daughter, the Enemy is at Memphis in 10 miles of her, I would not be surprised if they lose most all their property. I know they will feel so uneasy, but I look to God and pray to him to protect and defend my dear daughter and her family. I hope their lives will be spared that we may meet again is my daily prayer. Oh Heavenly Father, have mercy upon thy suffering people.
June 22
        This is my Father's birth day, he would be 68 years old if he was alive. I went to Carmel today to hear brother Pepper, his brother was shot through the hips in the battle, badly wounded. My husband is from home, I have felt sad to day. The servants have been stealing my things, I was fretted about it, and one of the was disobedient. I felt very bad and said too much. Lord forgive me for getting angry and saying too much.
June 30th
        Last Thursday was my birth day, I was 41 years old. My Heavenly Father has spared me for some purpose, to glory his name and advance his kingdom here on earth.
        I now consecrate myself and all that I have to my Saviour Jesus Christ, I am his and he is mine. I have been greatly blessed all along through my life, thanks and praise be ascribed to the Lord Jesus Christ.
        There has been another bloody battle near Richmond, between our army and the Enemy, 'tis said that the Lord enabled us to overcome the enemy this time. My husband has gone on to see what has become of our dear Willie, who might have been in the fight, but I have faith in God to believe that he is safe. I feel like the Lord will help him, and save him, because he puts his trust in God.