May 9th
        I have just heard of a terrible battle near Yorktown, our loss is 1200 in killed, wounded and missing. The enemy loss is great. I am in anxiety and suspense of mind about dear Willie, he was in the battle, his company suffered, was cut up. Oh my Heavenly Father, help to bear this great trial. I am so concerned about my dear boy, I do not know what his situation. My husband has gone to Danville to hear from the battle. Oh! this suspense of mind is so unpleasant, I never had such trials before in all my life, I pray for grace to bear it. I cannot get any tidings from my dear Mary Virginia, if the enemy are at Memphis they may flee to some place of refuge.
May the 11th
        My dear George started to Raleigh yesterday, his health is better.
May 14th
        I have heard from the battle at Williamsburg, my dear son was not hurt, he was sick in the hospital at Richmond during the battle, he has got better and gone to the army again. I thank God for preserving my child. I feel like praising him today for his goodness. I have received comfort from the Lord, I am cheerful again, the glory of God illuminates my soul, glory and honor to his name.
        Doctor Baily was wounded in the arm, I pray God to restore him to health.
        The 1st Sunday in this month, Brother Pepper held a meeting at Union, the sacrament was administered. I was blessed, and have peace ever since. I have not heard from our daughter yet, but I believe that God will bless her. I have committed my children into the hands of my Covenant keeping God.
May 17th
        We have received a long letter from our daughter. Mr. Williamson wrote that our daughter was confined on the 14th of April, had given birth to a son, and was doing tolerable well. (William Bethell Williamson.) I feel so thankful to God for blessing my dear daughter. I had faith to believe she would do well, the Lord heard and answered my prayer, glory and honor to his name. I will praise him with joyful lips, if I had a thousand souls I would give them all to God. Oh it is good to trust in God, "I called upon him in the day of trouble, and he delivered me, now I will glorify his name."
May 23
        Mr. Bethell returned from Danville last night, brought the sad news of the death of Sam Pinck Moore, a son of Sister Mary Moore's, he was a soldier in the army 12 months, he was sick in the hospital a long time, his Father reached there a few hours before he died, but thank God he was a professor of religion. I hope he has gone to rest with Jesus.