June 5th
        Last Thursday the 30th my dear son George left us to join the army, he joined the same company of his brother Willy. I suppose they have gone to Richmond, where there are 40,000 soldiers so 'tis said, it is a consolation to believe that my sons are in the hands of a merciful God. I hope and pray that they may be permitted to return home, if consistent with the Lord's will, I pray to God every day in their behalf, it is a trial to me, but I pray that our Country may enjoy peace and be independent. The thought of a bloody war is awful to contemplate.
June 18th
        My husband left here yesterday to go to Suffolk in Virginia to see my boys, George and Willy, he will stay 2 or 3 days, and return home next Saturday if nothing happens. I was much rejoiced to see an account of a brilliant victory achieved by our Southern soldiers at Bethell's Church in Virginia. The enemy retreated with the loss of 300 men, many wounded.
        The loss on our side was one man killed and several wounded, at the beginning of the battle (which lasted 4 hours) we had 1500 men while the enemy had 4000.
June 26th
        This is my birthday, I am 40 years old today. I can hardly realize it, time flys so rapidly, goodness and mercy have followed me from infancy to the present moment. I have been blessed, I can say today that I am in good health, have many kind friends, and all the comforts and necessarys of life. I have a precious Bible to read, can go to the house of God and hear my Minister preach the glad tidings of salvation. My hearing is bad, but by the aid of trumpets I can hear some of the sermon, enough to encourage me in the path to Heaven. I was blessed with a Christian Father, he led me in the way to Heaven.
        I am the Mother of nine children, two in Heaven now, I have one granddaughter and my two boys are soldiers in the army. My son Willy has professed faith in Christ. My husband went to Suffolk Virginia to see our two boys who are Soldiers in the army at that place, he got back last night, left our two Sons well and hearty. I was delighted to hear it, says they have plenty to eat.