Nov. 13th
        My husband left home this morning for Arkansa, to visit our daughter Mrs. Williamson, he said he would try to get back in two weeks. I thought it was best for me to stay at home with the children and take care of everything, and have the negro clothes made.
        I hope the family will keep well while he is absent, I shall look to the Lord for help. I have been tempted and tryed for several weeks, I have not been well for some time, suffering from constipated bowels. I hope the Lord will bless me in soul and body.
Nov. 26th
        The Lord has been good to me, he has answered my prayer, and blessed me in soul and body. My health is good now, I have been blessed in soul and body. I have just returned home from the Quarterly meeting at Wentworth. I spent a pleasant and interesting time. Brother Reid preached two excellent sermons on Saturday and Sunday, received one lady into the church, and baptized Sister Bruton's baby, named it John Fletcher. I met with several kind, Christian friends, enjoyed myself very much, thanks and praise to our Heavenly Father. I pray that God will make me pure in heart, I want to feel perfectly united to Christ, I have given myself to the Lord, soul and body, want him to lead and guide me, by his council and afterwards receive me to glory.
Nov. 27th
        I feel cheerful and happy today, I had the pleasure of giving something to a poor widow woman, the Lord has rewarded me for it by giving me peace in my soul.
        I will thank and praise God as long as I live, he is good to me. The weather is cold and unpleasant, I am sitting by a good fire sewing for the negroes, making their winter clothing.
        I have heard of another battle being fought on the Kentucky line, war is a terrible calamity, when we shall have peace our Father in Heaven only knows. The Enemy landed on the Coast of Georgia and took Port Royal and Fort Walker, they have erected their Flag.
Nov. 30th
        I was annoyed by vain and unprofitable thoughts for several days. I prayed to God to rid me of them, he has answered my prayer, I feel peace, I am encouraged to ask God for more grace, and that he may make my husband, children and servants Christians. I offer them all up to God, and beg him to bless them, that I may rejoice with them in Heaven.