July 2nd
        I am very anxious to hear from the battle, I heard that we had gained a great victory, we must thank and praise God for saving us from the cruel hands of our enemy, knowing that in all probability my dear son was in the battle, I would not have believed that I would be so composed, resigned, hoping and trusting in God to save my dear Soldier boy. I am not afraid of evil tidings, my heart is fixed, trusting in my precious Saviour, The Lord Jesus Christ. I pray to God to bless my dear daughter, who is exposed to the cruel Enemy. The Federals are at Memphis, my daughter lives 10 miles from there.
July 15th
        On Sunday the 6th of this month I went to Doctor Scales to attend the burial of Wallace Scales who was mortally wounded on the battle field the Tuesday the 1st of July, he lived 'til Thursday night, he professed faith in Christ, and I hope died a Christian Soldier. I pray that this death may be the means of bringing all the brothers and Sisters to Christ. My dear George is at home in fine health, he expects to leave us Thursday to join the 55th regiment of N.C. troops. I will feel sad when he leaves, but shall commit him to God.
        I shall look for my dear Willie to come home on Thursday, I desire to see him, I pray to God to bring him safely home. I attended the Quarterly meeting at Carmel Saturday and Sunday, no feeling or excitement. The meeting closed Sunday, but the Lord blessed my soul, I received a blessing since I came home. I felt comforted while partaking of the sacrament, the Lord is precious to my soul. My soul was happy this morning, I will praise God for his wonderful love and goodness to me.
July 21st
        My dear George left us last Wednesday the 16th to join his regiment 55, he is at Kinston now, he was in fine health. I have been looking for my dear Willie home every day. I was disappointed, I received a letter from George, he said that Willie would not be discharged until the 8th of August. I hope and pray that God may bring him safe home then.
        I have many trials, cares, vexations, sorrows, I need God's sustaining grace to comfort me and give me patience.
July 27th Sunday
        I did not go to Church today, last Tuesday Mr. Bethell and myself were sent for to go to Caswell to see Mr. Bethell's Mother to tell her of the death of her daughter Louisa Sneed, who died the 11th of this month leaving an infant 11 days old, she left six children, two of her sons are in the army, how uncertain is life, she was a member of the Episcopal Church, professed a change of heart. I hope she has gone to rest.
        I have felt the Lord had enabled me to cut loose of my affections from this world and set them on things above, how important it is to live near to God, to keep ourselves in readiness for death.
        Henry Hairston died the 24th of June, youngest son of Mrs. Agnes Hairston, he was a soldier in the army.
July 31
        I wanted to go to see Mrs. Hairston today, but the rain prevented me. I have many little trials, sorrows and temptations, but I find it is good to trust in God, for in every trouble he has been with me, to comfort and bless me, it is my business to serve my family and prepare to meet God, when he comes to judge the world. The Lord has been good to me and my children, I have two sons in the army, they have been blessed with health, and kept alive by God. I cannot hear from my daughter as the enemy have possession of that Country, but I have faith to believe that God will save her life, her husband, children and Indiana too, I commit then into the hands of my Saviour, I constantly pray for them.