May 1
        I have not written for some time. The war goes on with the same success on our side & the same pertinacity on the part of the Yankees. The last victory at Fredricksburg has been dearly bought by the loss of our hero Jackson, accidentally shot by his own men who would have died for him & since
reported dead of Pneumonia and his wounds. Van Dorn said to be murdered by a Dr Peters.
       The startling news has been going the rounds of the Village that this Rail Road is to be torn up to mend the main Roads. I don't know how we are to get away or hear of the outer world for the horses are all taken up by the Army and there will be no Stage or mail more than 1 or twice a week. Mr Grimball has gone to the City to meet John a telegram to him to do so, John ordered to sea. The successful repulse at Fort Sumter of the Iron Clads is a great triumph but they still talk of trying again. W. writes the whole world is speculating and includes parsons, Gens. I wish Mr Grimball could do a little success in that way for he needs it. -
       Lewis had a difficulty with his Captain & left is now in charge of the pickets on Johns Island, - he has not yet got his permit to be examined for Surgeon, which is a disappointment to him.
       The Rev. Mr Miles gave an address to the Graduating class Charleston College on God in History there are some lines which are his own very beautiful
                       "Fair faces beaming round the household hearth
                       Young joyous tones in Melody of Mirth
                       The sire doubly living in his boy,
                       And she, the Crown of all that wealth of joy;
                       These make the home like some sweet lyre given
                       To sound on earth, the harmonies of Heaven.
  A sudden discord breaks the swelling strain,
                       One chord has snapped; the harmony again
                       Subdued & slower moves, but never more
                       Can pour the same glad music as of yore;
                       Less & less full the strains successive wake
                       Chord after chord must break - and break - and break
                       Until on earth the lyre dumb & riven
                       Finds all its chords restrung to loftier notes in heaven".
       Miss Stone brought the Miss Lucas's to see Elizabeth & Gabriella ladies from Charleston but new acquaintances. Mrs Davidson & her daughter Mrs Caps came yesterday afternoon. Mrs D. has bought a house up here & now finds her self heartily tired of the life here, the days so long so long. - The only way to get along is to earnestly pursue a daily routine, & hope for the best and enjoy all that comes in ones way & be thankful.
       Mrs Wilkins and her daughters are going down and we are sorry for ourselves but glad on their account. Eliza's health is so miserable & she wishes to see Dr Geddings. -