February 13
        Mr Toomer Porter had a sale of his furniture & moved his family to Charleston. Mr Irwin the proprietor now lives in the other wing and keeps his school, to which Harry goes. -
       Miss Toomer & Miss Charlotte, her niece, are boarding at Mrs Thomsons . Her health is better, we visited her the other day and she complained of the fare, very little Milk, very little butter, always salt meat and now & then one fowl for 12 people. Her friends in Charleston find the price of all articles of food very high, Beef $1 per lb. She talked very earnestly of the difficulty of trusting any one. Once when very ill, she thinking herself likely to die, had a paper drawn up, & signed it, giving nineteen thousand dollars to a relation, one she thought was her friend, she recovered, but the money was taken, and she is allowed 5 hundred dollars a year, which she finds very hard to
get: What poor creatures we all are.
       There has been a great success at Galveston Texas, the Harriet Lane taken, and the Town; and at Sabine pass. In Charleston the Iron Clad Gun-boats went out, and sunk one of the vessels blocading the harbour. A Gun boat was taken in Stono River by Col. Yates's command. The Gun boat expedition has not proved so signal a success. A vessel the Princess Royal was taken by the Blocading squadron and is a great loss to the Government. It is thought the Gun boats might have taken her. Arthur went to Stono as one of the Signal Corps and seems quite pleased with his prowis . -
       Lieutenant Stevens lost his life in an engagement on the Mississippi River, his wife and Mother are bowed down with grief. -
       The time slips away but the much desired peace is still very far off, a great deal of property is offered for sale and changes hands at very high prices negroes particularly.
Feby 20
        Went over to see Mrs Irwin her husband used to keep the Mansion house in Greenville we met there. Mrs Lockwood the Miliner of the Village & Mrs Irwin sees every one in her bed chamber. Mrs Lockwood is a good looking woman and talked very sensibly of her business which just now consists in altering old straw hats into a fashionable shape, sewing them all over. She offered me some turnip greens out of her garden, which was quite civil, it seems Mrs Irwin very often sends to her
for the turnip tops, and Mrs L. said the maid who came for them cut them off with a large piece of turnip, the heart she said, and when spoken to informed them Mr Irwin only eat them in that way and seemed quite indifferent to the wasteful procedure. Mrs Irwin laughed very much, and said she would attend to it, and they talked of sick soldiers &c, very pleasantly. Mrs L's husband came for her, walking in the chamber with out knocking. He is a Tailor, so we found ourselves in rather unusual company. In a Village there is no distinction all meet[?] on an equality, and consequently the manners of these people are more refined; - or rather more alike than is usually found.