Dec. 30
        I have not written for a long time, & now before the New Year must write up. William paid us a visit which we all enjoyed, he had a bruised heel and was a great deal in the house he gave Harry lessons in Algebra and on X we had a noble Turkey which Mr Irwin let me have $5 the cost. We all dined heartily on it, and it lasted 4 days the last one making a very fine soup. -
       I had some collars made for W. & he went off quite
comfortably. Peggy who has been staying at the Irwin's in their wash room was informed they wanted the room so she came here in the wash room, and when the rain came & flooded the floor we moved her up stayrs , so it happened in the evening that W & H sat at the fire with their old Mauma W. smoking and the old Mauma smoking too: quite comfortably & having a cosy talk. She is a remarkable looking old woman and has been a faithful nurse to my children she must be now 82 or 3.
       There is an afflicted family in the Village Mrs Butler, who teaches the district school has lost her son who was in the Tresury department receiving good pay engaged to be married to Miss Lucy Lucas who has some fortune, was in Wilmington at some public building transacting business the day was very cold and the high stone steps frozen, both hands filled with papers; he slipped on the first step and fell the whole way down knocking his head at every step & was taken up insensible and died in two hours. - The Mother has the pity of everyone for she is a mild lady like woman and has suffered much her husband left her constantly for Months at a time & the last 2 years of his life lived with a woman in Philadelphia as his wife. He came on a visit to Richmond and there killed himself by jumping out of a window. The son was conducting himself very well. The Lord have mercy on her.
       Old Miss Stone an infirm old lady had her horse & carriage burnt up. The girls & Harry were at some tableau at the Court house & were very much alarmed at the glare of the fire thinking
the Court house on fire: there is a quantity of powder stored there. -