8th June.
        Lewis not being able to get a commission determined to go to Virginia as a private and Mr Henry Lesegne gave him a letter to Col. George Deas, & I gave him one, too, as he is my Cousin. Martin gave him a letter to Capn Cuthbert, he went off looking rather grave. It is a serious thing to leave home under such circumstances. He had a fine minie rifle got from Elliott, Captain of William's Company. If any thing happens to the gun it has to be paid for. His pistol a purchase of his own, a blanket, a skin to sleep on which could also answer to keep his knapsack dry. He has joined the Palmeto Guards and hopes to see some service. There seems to be a war spirit abroad with the young men, so many are going to Virginia. -
9th [June]
        Papa went to Somerville to visit Russel Middleton, he returned quite charmed with the place and the good living. -
Gov. and Martin dined here last week. Adela is going to have another baby, this will be the 5th it is really terrible. -
       Papa is very naive, he told me he was better here than he had been because of his diet at my table. The Market, is high and I pay nearly $2 each day for dinner, when by ourselves it costs me 50¢.
10 [June]
        We got on as usual, the weather is very warm. The war progresses slowly and not always satisfactorily. - Elizabeth had Miss Aiken, the Manigaults to tea, Mrs Vanderhorst & Mrs Wayne. - Mrs V. has given several parties the last very handsome. Miss Adele is the attraction, Mr Arnold the beau, William thinks it promises very fair. A. Vanderhorst has gone to the War, hoping to be made aid to B. Gen. Bee. - There have been sailing parties and Evening parties. -
       The news from Virginia is rather warlike, we are all the time kept anxious about the state of affairs but time seems just to strengthen the cause of the South, and make it more probable that we shall succeed. -
       I had a visit from Mrs Trenholm yesterday evening and found her very pleasant. She spoke kindly about my sons, said they were so well considered in the community and that Arthur was an honest high toned young man. Mr T. said so & he knew for he had business transactions with him. All this was very pleasant to me. -
June 29
        Lewis writes very pleasantly about his campaign in Virginia, I rather think he likes the excitement. His
Company have moved forward and form the advance guard of the Southern Army, and this he likes, he would prefer remaining in Virginia to keeping his Commission of Lieutenant.
       The St. Paul's Rifles have been ordered to the Coast and are at Clarks Bay where they are not likely to see any service. - John is in Beaufort. -