June.
        Berkley came up 10 days since for his furlough he looks well and is quiet and as he always has been. He leaves us on Tuesday 9th to return to his Artillery. I am not satisfied that he is in a healthy position but they give the men quinine. We have been very glad to see him.
       Vicksburg holds out finely there has been a very destructive Raid on Combahee, Millions of property destroyed & carried off; 6 or 7 hundred negroes by 200 Armed negroes with
white Officers.
       We have now been up here a year and think of remaining until the fall, we have a nice little garden and some promising chickens. -
21st [June]
        Arthur came up on the 10 & remained 10 days he had his clothes washed & mended & several little things done for him, we found him improved. Mr Grimball gave him 100 dollars to assist in paying his mess bill &c. It was a pleasant visit, we were glad to see him.
28th June
        Received a letter from Papa in which he says Mr G. Lowndes & Mr Heyward have sold their Combahee places very well & advises Mr Grimball to sell his plantations he goes down on Friday the 3d to arrange matters if possible. -
       The prices of articles of food are very high. Bacon $1.25 per lb Corn $3.50 per bushel & in Charleston cows sell for 3 hundred & 50 dollars. Mrs Wilkins writes she has one but did not buy it & sold her calf for $60 was told afterwards she ought to have got more her son Berkley paid $6 for a breast of veal.
       Arnoldus Vanderhorst who is now Major on Whiting's staff was married to Miss Adele Allston with 10 groomsmen, and all things in the usual style, a fine supper & two receptions with cake and wine, in these war times quite appreciated.
       John has been ordered to sea and ran the blocade with a party of officers in charge, 8, he was delighted & wrote to
us from Bermuda that every roll of the Ocean seemed the welcome of a friend, he thinks he is to go to France. Charles also went out with a party & got to Nauso, after a boisterous voyage, and being shot at by the Yankees. -