12th April
        Things seem at last to have reached the War point. The 17th Regiment has been ordered down to Morris's Island, and The Northern Government have sent to inform the Southern that they intend to reinforce the Forts, and collect the revenue. A fleet is expected off the Harbour, and every thing is in a state of preparation. - 4 of the boys are on duty, Berkley in the Sumpter Guards, and Arthur & William in the Cadet Riflemen. Lewis wants to volunteer in the Sumpters, I think he ought not. John is now on constant duty, and seems actively engaged; he wrote to us yesterday that he had been in Town for Anchors, and found the house deserted, only Adam, covered with White Wash. He said he was alive but he could not say kicking, for he could hardly move one leg before the other, he was so tired. - Mr Grimball went down to see about the boys, and found them all gone, he will return on Saturday, and then we shall hear. All yesterday I was in a most terrible state of anxiety and misery, about my boys - but I know my case is not different from others. Mrs Elliott, the Mother of William's Captain, has her
only child down there, Mrs Lowndes her only son, & many others, but mine are very fine boys, and very dear to me, still they must do their duty to their State; and I put my trust in my God, & their God, my Savior & their Savior, - and I Pray for them & for myself. - The Government at Washington seem full of duplicity, and in looking back to the conduct of the seceding States, there seems to have been a truthful and noble faith, actuating them.
       Fortunately, before things came to the War, the interest was paid on the money at the North, and I have mine now in Charleston, six hundred and ninety seven dollars. I am very glad of this for it will help us through the Summer. -
       Mrs Bulow & Mrs Gammage have left Charlotte, they were sent for. -
       Went to Papa's this morning he had been to Mr Barnwell to hear the news. Mr B. wrote to his wife that yesterday at 1 o'clock Gen. Boregeard demanded the surrender of the Fort from Anderson, he replyed he could not with honor, and this morning at 5 o'clock the war began, we have not heard the guns. The news is that the "Harriet Lane" U S S is out side with troops and supplys .
14th [April]
        Lewis went down yesterday afternoon and returned today by an express train, he brings us news that Fort Sumpter is given up, after a gallant defence, when Major Anderson evacuated it, he requested to be allowed to salute his Flag, and Gen.
Boregard said, that he had defended his command so bravely that he should be permitted to do so. He wrote to his wife a letter which was sent to Gen. B. to forward, he had to open it, - and it was said to contain these words, among others, "My Government have shamefully abandoned me" and I shall now fight and die like a man".
       There were none killed on either side, the Fort has been destroyed inside, - Officer's quarters burnt. -
       The men looked thin & smoked up with the shells which were most of them sent by Stephen's Battery; Fort Moultry was uninjured, 5 men wounded in the evacuated Fort. -
       How thankful we are, not however as much so as we ought to be;
       Yesterday after Church I stopped to see Papa, this I always do on Sunday and these visits are very pleasant to me. He loves us all in his way & gives me some oysters which he buys from Mr La Roche's man who brings them for sale to the Church, - and I hear family news. During this excitement and anxiety I do not think Charlotte has been very kind in her manners, she I have no doubt felt, but on such occasions people ought to express themselves to be understood, I find her an excellent, well principled woman, with a disagreeable temper, & no manners: but in this world we must be thankful for the good we find in those who belong to us, and not judge them too harshly. -
Charlotte has on many occasions been kind to us all, and I thank her. Mr Grimball remained in Town until tomorrow. - Mrs Butler writes to Papa that the Overseer came to her & said he had a letter from Mr Pierce Butler saying he must send a boat to take his to W. Simon's & send Eleck. She ordered him not to send the boat and that Eleck was waiting on her. She said she was there, in charge of the property, & would continue so, has written to Judge Law to confirm her action she says her case is a very hard one, and she deplores it. Richard seems to be very ill, spits blood, & coughs, and she writes very wofully of him, & says she certainly will not leave him in Georgia, he has an Overseer, and leaves things to him. Charles also has an Overseer, and being engaged in fixing guns in Fort Pulasky, and expecting to be in a steamer in coast guard all summer will be able to visit his Plantation, & see about his affairs, I don't think Richard & Charles get on very nicely, - & I am sure it must be Richard's fault, for Charles is a very kind, good tempered man, and Richard has always been very self willed & passionate. -
       Harry during the transaction of our business together wrote me a very nice letter, he expresses a kind interest in my boys and I love him for it; and he hopes still for a Reconstruction. That may be hoped for but can never, never, be.
       There have been too many bitter feelings between the two sections and it seems to me it would have been just as reasonable for us to be rearranged as British provinces soon after the Revolution broke out, as for us to go back to a Government with our taunting, Fanatic, Northern brothers. -
15 [April]
        This morning we received a very pleasant visit from Charlotte, she feels but does not know how to express herself. Mr Aiken also came over and paid a very pleasant visit. He told us of the early history of General Boregard, he was a graduate of West Point & the second honour man, he had become very much attached to Virginia Scott, the daughter of Gen. Scott, & was refused by both parents but accepted by the young lady, she wrote to him but his letters were repressed and hers ceased after a time. This preyed on her health, she went into the Catholic Convent at George Town, and there died, before her death she sent for Gen. Boregard and saw him, he explained to her that he had always written, the letters were kept from her. She died, but 6 Months after he married another. "Men have died and worms have eaten them but not for love". - (And now has a second wife).
       In this days paper there is an account of the evacuating of the Fort Sumpter. Anderson has gone to the Fleet, this is the first time the U.S. Flag has been lowered, and now to the Palmetoe Flag. -
       There seems to be a determination on the part of the Northern Government to war with us. When Major Anderson fired the salute to his Flag, 5 of his men were wounded, & 1 of them died immediately, the other not expected to live. This is very strange. I think my State has behaved most entirely according to the dictates of humanity, & true courage, in the treatment of the people in this Fort, they were fed, and beaten, & honourably dismissed. -
We have done well, & I this morning read a commendation in the papers "the World", an Abolition journal, of the conduct of South Carolina, "throughout this contest & since secession" . The unselfish bravery with which she had conducted herself". - May God bless and keep us, is my prayer, and may peace be restored to these States, may we each, North, & South - Governed by those who best understand our rights & our wants, I mean ourselves, be good neighbors & help each other on in the road to prosperity. -
       On Sunday the scene in St. Philips was very affecting. Our Bishop Davis, now very feeble and blind was led up to the pulpit and returned thanks to Almighty God for his protection & his mercies. He, too had a relative among the troops. - Mrs Wayne went down to the City on Saturday and the cars being very much crowded & late in getting down. Lewis had to charge himself with the getting these two Mrs W. &her Mitchel in a carriage. It was 12 o'clock at night before they all got at home. Lewis found no one but his father at home & he seems quite well, the war agrees with him.
22 April.
        Virginia has seceded and all the border States seem to be coming in: the movements of the U.S. Government have been very suicidal every act tells in a way to benefit us. There has been a riot in Philadelphia in which the Black Republican spirit was fully exhibited, all the accounts tend to shewing a determination at the North to sustain the Government and so there is at the South; - I believe this will give peace.
       Arthur was sent up from Morris's Island to the City
to get over an attack of Dysentary . Mr Grimball went down to see after him. -
       Every where there are commotions great and small, in Charleston. Taking Fort Sumpter, up here. Mr Elliott said he would hear the children their chatecism and Harry although he has been learning his for 6 years did not know it so said Mrs Barnwell of her two, Richard & Ella, she said she felt as if she would be humiliated, I told Mr Elliott of Harry's deficiancy. So last Sunday the children went up, after a most charming sermon addressed to the parents, and said their chatecism very well, H. had learnt his all the week, & Mr Elliott gave them some books which they either are to read & keep, or return. - Mr Elliott is to preach 2 more Sundays, is to recieve 3 hundred dollars, for the 3 Month, - and will come back next winter. - Mr Dixson the Presbyterian Minister has resigned, from ill health, - and gone away. -
       Yesterday Mrs Wayne came late & spent the evening. She took tea, & went away at 1/2 eleven, she gave the history of her Mitchel. She was married at the age of 16 to a young man named Hardenbrook, he had a large fortune, settled it seems on his children. They were divorced, and she took her maiden name, the children are given to the father's Mother & she is allowed to see them. 2 little boys, 1, 4, the other 7. Mr Hardenbrook this lady says is a very abandoned man. I do not think her manners
impress favorably. - Mrs Wayne gave a very amusing account of her ox, & little blue cart getting Mrs Rosalie Mitchel's heavy baggage to the cars, the ox several times took to the woods & swamp. This animal is large and harnessed with blinds, an old horse fixing. Mr Lewis has hired Russell Middleton's house on South bay for the summer, this Mrs L. does not like the place, is rather too public. She is shy, & not always attentive to her appearance. I am glad of her being there for I like her. - The Governess they had early in the winter was a very mischief making woman, she wrote notes to Mr Lewis, noticing Annie's treatment of Julia, her step daughter, trying to excite him against her. - Spoke in a most disorganizing way to the servants. -
       The last visit we paid to Mr Barnwell, Ann spoke in great disgust of Miss Juliet Elliott's malicious style of remark, she said several things calculated to excite them against Charlotte & Heyward. Ann, & her Mother said this did not have that effect, but disgusted them with Juliet. - Poor old woman, a bitter, spiteful temper is a fearful companion. -
25 [April]
        Mr Grimball returned and brought up John, who is now a Midshipman again, with the prospect of being made Master, like the rest of his date, as he resigned when his State did, 2 weeks before his examination, had excellent letters from the Officers who were on board the Macedonian with him 1 of course from the Captain, and an unusual honor, one signed by the other Officers, - he seems to have through all the stirring events of
this winter, conducted himself well, & Gov. Pickens who gave him a Lieuts. commission. always behaved well to him. -
       He sent his letters to the Secretary of the Navy, at Montgomery, and the reply from Malory was that owing to all the circumstances of the case, it should be presented to the President for consideration, and Gov. Pickens endorsed a letter from John to the same effect. - So the matter stands.
       Papa has been arranging a plan for Mrs Butler to reside for the summer at Grass Knowl , a healthy place & belonging to Georgia: Charles having a home there suited to his Plantation. She wrote that she was very much disgusted with her situation, and the annoyance of contending with Mr Butler, who had arrived in Darien to take posession as soon as she left. We hear that she has gone North so suddenly that she had not time to write; if she can live there without any annoyance from owning Southern Property, or rather being supported by it, I think she has done best for herself. For 34 years, ever since her marriage, she had enjoyed a degree of affluence and fashion, there, which must have made her identify herself with the people & with the place. She is now a very stout old woman; & these comforts which she has there must be very dear to her. She has been much separated from her own family, and is accustomed to her luxury, & her loneliness. - I hope she may enjoy the former, all her days, & have the other remedied by the society of her daughter & grandchildren.
24 April
        Charles writes to Papa that he has been ill with Dysentry, he was better, and had been so kindly treated by Mr Nightengale and Comodere Tatnel. He says after this his letters are to be directed to Captain Morris. - He is in charge of the Warship. He had a very fine colt at Papa's which in this letter he requested Papa to send to him as he wished to present it to Mr Nightengale. - The colt died just a few days since, and I am sorry for Charles' loss, but I do not think Mr N. would like to accept such a present: as his daughter has refused Charles. -
       Mrs Butles had joined a party going North, the journey was to be very long, round by Tenasee . The Cumberland river, Ohio river to Pitsburg in Pennsylvania. -
       Mr John Elliott's Father preached for us & gave the Communion on Sunday, the son is a better preacher. - The old gentleman looks stuffy and fading away, as we all are. - The mails are stopped from the North, and consequently we are quite at a loss for news; the last accounts were very warlike, from Maryland there had been a meeting between the people of Baltamore & the troops coming from New York & Pennsylvania, ordered to Washington by Mr Lincoln. Lewis is trying now to get his Company, the St Paul's Rifles to volunteer to go to Virginia in the 1 Regiment, Col. Johnston Petigrew commander. They don't seem so willing, these men, as the Officers & Lewis have been going round the Parish to try and get the complement of men. On Saturday they had 12, including Officers, and they require 45.
I don't think they have much chance.
       Lewis seems to have been very unsuccessful in his plans up here, he tried raising hogs and finding it would not pay has sold out to some man in the Pineland who I am sure will never pay him, his whole stock for $80. -