November 5th
        Papa went off this morning with his man and his maid and I hope he will get down comfortably and be able to stay on his plantation. He went off feeling very sad and with heavy forebodings, but the times cause that. - The poor old gentleman we shall miss him very much, all his ridgid ways were sometimes very distressing. He disliked Harry and I can't wonder at that for he is a most disagreeable child, excitable and worrying and without feelings of proper respect for those older, a noisy & trying child. The stately and old time politeness which was kept up between Mr Grimball & Papa is not often seen now. Mr Grimball read history to him and he made remarks and the two looked like specimens of long forgotten breeding only to be met in books: he heard more books talked of by Mr
G. than he ever heard in his life.
       Berkley Wilkins came up here to bring his wife to stay with Mrs Faber her Aunt; B. took down a carpet we sent for the soldiers, and 2 blankets & $50. -
       Arthur has moved to Town and sent up for his clothes and as I had no trunk they were put in a bag. He was quite in want of a trunk and some more clothes: poor child Mr Grimball went out this morning to try & get him some shoes & pants.
27 November
        Mr Grimball returned from Camden with the box of silver which we now have up here and has gone to Charleston where he intends offering his services for Military duty in the Reserves, Captain Lesegne. He is under 65 & the Governor and Council have called out all men under 65 and of 16 to do Military duty. I have received 3 letters from him he was when last writing at the Bluff on a visit to Papa and the abandoned Plantation with the 13 old negroes left there. Our own soldiers are most destructive in their visits to houses left, and entered ours and helped themselves to what they liked. When this war does end the poor Planters on the Coast will be found in a miserable plight. Berkley offered Mr Grimball his stock to purchase a place to put the negroes on which he declined but it was very kind of B. He had just passed through another attack of fever. - A. & W. are at Fort Sumter, Lewis on Sulivan's Island. John writes to Ella from Mobile that he has some pleasant ladies to visit there, and that the Navy is held in great repute since
Admiral Buchanan came there which state of things he is enjoying. -
       The time & the war goes on and we hope in spite of every thing there will soon be a peace. At present not a ray of the quarter from which it will spring but the triumph of the Democratic party at the North, and the little success they have yet arrived at South: the Removal of McClellan is too in our favor. Burnside is represented as a man of Military education but urged on by the Abolition party at the North may be induced to hazard a battle which we think he will loose . The Lord is over all and in his hands we are, to destroy or to save. -
28 [November]
        The weather cold thankful we are where we can get wood the price here is $2.50 for a cord. There is great difficulty in getting change, fortunately this morning I got a $20 bill changed, by purchasing $4 worth of Meal. -
       Two poor women recently came here to beg. I was not able to give them meal, for I find it hard to get it for my own family, and had no change: but this morning when I was in the Village I passed one of them & gave her 25¢ having felt badly at refusing her all aid, when she applyed to me at the door. -
       John has been made first Lieutenant which pleases him very much, no more pay but a better position. -
       Elizabeth goes to dine with her Aunt every Saturday, to spend the day with Eliza, who is very much out of health. -
       Miss Clemy Legg sent a message to Elizabeth requesting
her to come and see her, yesterday afternoon Gabriella & herself went to return Miss Butler's visit, her Mother teaches at the District School, was a Miss Stone, is a widow, - and then went to see Miss Legg. -
       Mrs Legg told the Wilkinses that her daughter found Elizabeth perfectly charming and enjoyed the Saturdays when they practised for Sunday. E. leads the choir. She really sings very well indeed - she has improved herself wonderfully. -