September 2
        Elizabeth devotes all her mornings to teaching Lotty & Harry and in so doing tires herself very much and in the case of Harry is conferring a benefit most thankfully received. I know no one so cultivated and elegant in her manners as Elizabeth, or accomplished, she has a disciplined, and highly improved mind, and is the help to her parents & her brothers & sisters, and the adorning attraction to the family circle.
       Gabriella is trying earnestly to cultivate herself, and I am afraid labours too hard to attain her object. She is
graceful and elegant looking & posesses a natural cleverness of expression, very admirable, but her morbid feelings are the cause of much unhappiness to herself. Lotty will be very handsome when she is fully developed and through E's care she will be a cultured & elegant young woman. - Harry is naturally clever but is not steady enough to do very hopefully. -
       Ann Smith & Mrs Eddings came to see us yesterday afternoon & Juliett Eddings, Miss Atkinson from the other Wing came in to tell us good bye she is going to pass some time with her Sister, Mrs Dozier the wife of Lieutenant D who has a house in Charleston. -
September 5
        There are great successes to our arms in Virginia and I fear great losses. Mrs Irwin our landlady came in after tea to tell us of it a very kind hospitable woman quite a register of family events in the society which surrounds her, but although she narrates well and accurately and takes one through the lives of those she talks of from the cradle to the tomb the perfect ignorance about these people, except from what she says makes one take no sort of interest in them, it is just simply life & death. - Dr Whiteford Smith who is the President of the Colledge up here paid us a visit yesterday morning, and made me feel pleasantly all day. A clever, good, genial man, his only son is now with the Army, and he told us they had felt anxious to get warm clothes for him, and his wife a great contriver, had taken the checked flannel out of a large cloak of his and made some shirts for him, he bought a thick great coat, and intended
going to Virginia to see his son and give him these warm clothes. The young man is just 18, and said he wished to take his share in this struggle and not have it said to him when the independance was achieved that he was enjoying what he had not worked for. -
       Dr Smith thinks the war will be a great benefit to the country, enlargement of mind to very ignorant, contracted, country people. The families of soldiers now take news papers, and if they can't read themselves they get people to read to them, and some of them have learned to read themselves. One woman in his neighborhood whose husband, a hard working man and gone off to the wars, had learnt to write & read writing since her husband left her, and he had, too, learned to read & write that he might write to her, she could read his letters, but no other writing. - Dr S talked in the most charming way of Bulwer's Novels, he prefers the Caxtons & My Novel to all his other books, and Ducroux, does not like Dickens, thinks his caracters distorted and exagerated , which spoils all the beauties, Thackery he has not read having begun his lectures, with the Yellow Plush Papers. - And could only get through 2 pages. I wish he would come again. The weather now is very charming, heard from John, he had not yet got his orders, was at Mobile when he wrote. -
       We walk every afternoon and get on very comfortably. -
September 7th
        News was brought yesterday that we had again gained a great Victory, at the old battle ground Manassas,
and among those slain were Dr Smith's only son, and several other young men graduates of this College, excellent moral characters. What a loss to their families, and how these parents are bowed with trouble. Miss Clem Legg, sister of the young ladies who called on Elizabeth, was engaged to Mr Palmer, a very fine young man, one of the killed, and her sister Mary was in the train of an engagement with Mr Capers, also slain, and said to be a most charming person.
       Mrs Walker who keeps a Hotel here went to Richmond, after the first of the battles, in that neighborhood, to bring home her son's body, said to be killed. She found him severely wounded and brought him home, he is now well except a stifened arm, she says she shall all her life consider this step, against the advice of her friends, an especial providence. - She visited one of the Hospitals, near Richmond, which contained 4 thousand patients, & said no one who did not witness the sufferings there could realize the horrors of the war.
       A lady of Richmond daily accompanied by two servants brought, and administered herself, a quantity of fine, nutritious chicken soup. One young man had an old negro man who sat by him & fanned off the flies. She stopped and told him she hoped he would get well, he shook his head and said no, he could not he was too badly wounded, the servant remained with him until he died, and then after preparing his body for the grave, bundled up his things, put them on his head and went off home.
       The Grave Yard where the Military burial takes place
has two in each grave, numbered & marked so that they can be identified. She saw the Yankee Major Biddle there, he died of his wounds, and had the most vindictive feelings to the last, said it was a horrid war, and would never end.
       There has been so much counterfeiting of Confederate Bank bills that all the 20, 50, & 100 bills have to be called in of the issue of 2 September '61. Mr Grimball has to go down to Charleston to change those that he has, he goes on Tuesday, not feeling very well. -
       We heard from Mrs Butler, her grandchildren have been sent to California to their father and she says she is perfectly crushed and miserable poor dear soul how dreary life will be to her: she perfectly idolized her daughter. -
       Papa called me down stayrs this morning to tell me about his affairs, he has some money or Confederate bonds in the Bank of Charleston and up here in the hands of Mr Judd 709 70¢ & in his press the bill & the money to pay the corn for Mr Kirkland. - His will & papers are in the hands of Mr Robertson. -
       We hear from Mrs Irwin and others of the distress of Miss Legg. She seems broken hearted. She has been engaged 3 years to Mr Palmer, he is from the low Country, was handsome, well born, rich and cultivated. The 3 young men, Whiteford Smith Capers & Palmer were in the Spartan Rifles and shot by one ball & found lying close together. It would have been a comfort to this poor girl if she had been married to her love, and then she could have mourned with his family and had a claim on their sympathy.
The success of our arms continues, we hope that this may lead on to peace. -
17 [September]
        Martin came up and paid a short visit to his Mother looks as usual. Berkley writes to me the company has been so much reduced by detatchments that they have quite hard duty. A few evenings before he wrote, 3 negroes Henry Lowndes servant Lucas's servant and one of the teamsters had gone off to the Yankees which made them feel a little uneasy about their exposed situation. A night attack from the Gun Boats might annoy them very much.
       Mr Grimball returned from the City having purchased some candles $1.25 per lb. horrid looking yellow bad smelling things. - Brought me some Yeast from the Bakers and I have commenced baking Rolls for breakfast. -
       Papa got so very much bothered about the corn fearing he might be made to pay more than his share that I concluded it best to pay up at once for all that I was to use $1.37 per bushel although he bought some at $1.10 and the rest at $1.25 and paid $4 for the carting. I paid for two bushels already settled for and now we are free from accounts together and he seems better satisfied. Some weeks ago I changed 4 lbs. brown sugar for him for 4 lbs. best white, and he could not rest until it was weighed before his eyes which was done. My Papa has a very mean mind and is an extremely close man, he wonders at my buying
peaches for the children and thinks it a great expense, he cannot eat them. He really lives here in the most comfortable way at the smallest expense. He talks now of going down to the low Country as soon as possible to see after his business and yesterday offered me the use of 3 rooms in his house. I would rather Charlotte should take charge of him in winter and hope I may not be obliged to live in his house. Now I have no home for our Plantation is broken up, our house in Town is only a hired one & upon the whole I may consider myself at home any where my family & trunks &c are. -
       Mr Irwin paid us a visit yesterday & told us Mrs Kenedy's family were very anxious about Clem Legg. It seems there is a case of derangement in her family, a daughter who lives with them and is quite out of her right senses, it came about unexpectedly, and there is a risk of this young ladys being equally afflicted, she takes her trouble in such a silent, stunned way. -
       Mr Grimball transacted his business very successfully he saw William & Lewis, this last moved from Church flatts to Sulivans Island. Dr Lining met Mr G in the street and spoke very well of Lewis' practise which I think was very kind as Drs do not like to praise one another. He said Lewis has lost very few cases. -
       William was not very well. There had been a duel from the Fort, Alfred Rhett killed Ransom Calhoun a man he particularly hated, and as the thing was not represented to the
Military Authorities there had as yet been no notice of it taken.
19 [September]
        Yesterday was set apart by the Government as a day of Thanksgiving for our Victories. We went to the Methodist Church and heard a fair sermon by Mr Stacy and a very fine prayer from Whiteford Smith there was a collection taken up for the wounded soldiers I put in $4. -
       Gov Wilkins passed through here yesterday and came to see us in the evening. He has been on a visit to his family in Greenville and looks badly. He was on his way down & stopped to see his Mother. - Gov travelled here in Stage from Greenville with an old lady in black she said she had lost her only son in one of the Battles and her daughter being very much attached to her brother died soon after him. Her son in law was in Service and she did not feel much interest in the war she had lost both her children and they could not be restored. The family distress is dreadful. -
30th September
        There has not been a rising in Maryland as was expected and as far as rumor gives us information we have not gone on so gloriously as was expected, but only by hard fought battles kept our ground against our treacherous foe.
       Miss Juliet Elliott invited Elizabeth to pass a day with her and take a ride to Glenns Springs she went yesterday. I am glad of a little diversion for her she has such hard work teaching Harry. -
       Mr Irwin who is a perfect chronicle of parish events
came to see us the other evening and told us that Mrs Wilson had left Mrs Tompson's with a half Month unpaid $47 that she talked very freely about people & would lead those she spoke to into the belief no one was of any account except her family, the Gibbes. I liked her very well her manners are easy but she comes of a family not considered truthful and on that account not much regarded. -
       Dr Boyds wife a Miss Tompson Mrs I. says drank, and was subject to fits brought on by the use of stimulants he had a life of it with her. She died young and left 7 children inheritors of her habit, for I believe intemperance is inherited, - just as much as gout or scrofulous consumption.
       We got our shoes from the Mute Rogers $ paid $4. 25 for each 1 pair for Ella & Lotty & 1 pair for myself. They look like strong well made shoes I have ordered a pair for Harry to be done in six weeks. This seems to be a district of a low character in Morals I do not hear of any one being more correct than another. Mrs I. says Mrs Legg who was a Miss Kenedy married a man much beneath her in family and it came about in this way. The Kenedys moved up here from Charleston for the health of Mr K and Miss L was pleased with this Mr Legg and engaged herself to him not knowing anything about him and after her marriage found he had very low relations. - Which shows the imprudence of marrying among strangers. -