14 Dec.
        Mr Grimball paid us a visit having a furlough from his company, he had a bad cold, and during his stay it was very cold he returned to Charleston and Military life. I think rather pleased with the fact that he, too, is doing what he can to help. -
       Things get on here very much as usual. Just now Elizabeth has given a 2 weeks holiday to her School, grateful to herself, and very joyful to Harry. Miss Legg called to take Elizabeth for an excursion to the Iron Mills; Miss Palmer, the sister of the young man Clemy was engaged to, was with her on a visit, and her Grand Mother Kenedy's carriage, a most tumbled up concern, the drive was to the Rolling Mills. The iron of this district is very fine, and they saw the process of preparing the Iron, and brought home some specimens. The ride was a pleasant one, and as they carried a lunch, E. returned home very much pleased. - A little joy. - Miss Palmer is not in black, there is a large family & the father said he could not afford to put them all in mourning.
     We have accounts of families wandering round from the threatened cities of Fredericksburg and Fort Royal in Virginia finding refuge in Cabins by the wayside. We have the comfort of a home and ought to be thankful. -
31 Decr
        This is the last day of this year - the success of our Army at Fredricksburg and the account of the difficulties at the North give us evidence of an and to this dreadful strife: but the change comes so slowly, ones wishes are not realized. Patience will have its perfect work.
       Elizabeth had a charming Christmas day, owing to the kindness of Miss Legg. She was invited to spend the day with Mrs Dawkins, at Union, where there is a very nice Episcopal Church, the only difficulty was the rising so early to go by the cars. E. was up in time, and came back in the evening, unexpectedly accompanied by her father, who got a furlough, and is now with us. E. had a charming day. Mrs D. is an energetic woman, and having no children her self , takes great interest in other peoples children. There was a plentiful breakfast on their arrival, and then the Christmas tree for the children, with little gifts made by kind hands. After the tree they practised the Church Music, then went to Church, where E. took her place in the Choir, they returned to Mrs D's, had a real Christmas dinner, and came home by the cars in the afternoon. We went to hear Mr Whiteford Smith preach in the morning, had a fine sermon, paid a visit to
the W's, came home to a dinner of Roast pig and a pudding, which we all enjoyed. I have my Turkey for New Year's day. In the evening short cake, and a great deal of pleasant talk. - Just now we have some sausages, and I am glad Mr Grimball is with us to enjoy them.