10 August
        We heard from Lewis, a full account of his fatigue & the Victory. Henry Middleton, a private in Hampton's Legion was Mortally wounded during the fight, since dead, a great lose to his family. He managed all the Large Planting interest brought home and interrod at the Magnolia.
       The Town since the Battle has been divided into societies for the Relief of the Wounded & Clothing for the troops. Elizabeth belongs to both. Miss Hayne requested me to be one of the managers to the Aid Society which I declined, but we made some long hospital shirts and when they were sent to Miss Hayne, 10 of them, she said they were very nice and afterwards meeting Elizabeth on the Batery said they were the best sent to them & should be ticketed for "Officers". It is amusing for when we made them we all said as we sewed this is for a Col. &c. &c. E. goes to Miss Drayton's twice a week to cut & to sew I think she will learn to sew &c which she does not know much about. Mr Grimball applied to Gov. Pic for a Commission for Lewis and got an answer to day , he could not offer him anything but an Assistant Sergeant's Place. I don't know if Lewis will accept it. -
19 August
        Things go on very successfully. The Southern forces have beaten the Union Army in the West. William was made one of the prize commissioners and went to North Carolina to see after a prize. He placed seals on it and took possession and returned home, - rather a fatiguing journey to Beaufort on the Coast. Since his return the Governor of N. C. has taken possession,
too, so the matter has to be decided in Court. W. might get 1 or 2 hundred dollars for his work: - perhaps he will only have his expenses paid. There is much fever all over the Country now, and also in the City, Typhoid. The accounts from the Army are that 20 thousand troops are ill & wounded &c., and that the South Carolina troops are the worst provided & the North Carolina the best. The Counties are assessed in that State & the men provided in that way. There was a sad accident on Sulivan's Island, Mr Tom Porcher trying to save his niece while bathing was drowned, also the young lady, Miss Ellen White, 14 years old. -
       Papa writes that he has been suffering from his gout. -
24 [August]
        Received a letter yesterday from Lewis he hopes to soon get home & accepts thankfully the Commission of Assistant Surgeon in the State Forces, and in reply to Arthur's wish to go out to Virginia if in no other way as a private, says he had better not, for it is the life of a Hound, and now unless they enlist for the War, recieve no pay and have to support themselves. We hired a carriage the other afternoon and paid some visits. We paid $3 and fortunately got through 8 in the upper part of the Town, Miss Nowels, Miss Mazike, Mrs Hayne, Mrs Taber, Mrs Alice Heyward, Mrs Trenholm, Miss Turnbull, Miss Mitchel. - We shall after a while have to get it again.
       Lotty is learning to draw this summer and seems to like it better than Music. - Ella & herself have a nice set of friends. -
       There has been quite a flare up in Mrs Wilkinses' family,
the poor things do so want a ruling principle, every one does as he or she pleases, and they all are self indulgent, and indolent, in short badly brought up. Gov. has got himself into a miserable trouble, quareled with his father in law, his wife, an adopted child and has a large and increasing family. She, Adela, is one of the self indulgent ones, and must go to Greenville every summer, leave him to annoy his Mother & sisters.
       His little daughter died at Grahamville, little Eliza, from neglect. Adela was ill at the time. He rules at his Mother's, is rude to his Sisters and induces Martin to be so, too, they all had a war talk and are now better friends. In my family, the Morises, they often quareled , but they always made up. The Wilkins's are very rigid people and can't forget they have through the ill management of Berkley Wilkins & Gov brought into non intercourse with the Taber concern & the T. Lowndes. I think people ought never to quarrel with any one.