10th March
        This is my wedding day and the first time we have not passed it together. Mr Grimball is now in Charleston to try and arrange his business he thinks he will be obliged to sell his negroes. The interest of his debt for the Plantations goes on & we are living on what little ready money we have & no income to be expected. Mr G. feels this proposed sale very much & I should not be surprised if he gave it up as he writes me word the price will only be 6 hundred round and there is no longer a hope of investing in 8 per cent Confederate bonds but the 7 per cent. I hope he may be directed in the right way I pray that he may, and however things turn out he has always acted as a high toned, honorable man, and that must be a great comfort. He troubles himself at having given notice with regard to his bonds, to the Morris's, so sensitive is his feeling of right. Yet he had the
opinion of Mr Lesegne, one of our best Lawyers to guide him, & went by the laws of the Confederacy. -
       Charles's wife has a little daughter, called after my Mother, which will make us all like her, she writes very pleasantly to Elizabeth.
       Lewis has been quite sick with a bilious fever at the house in Town, Dr Giddings attending. Last Spring he had Typhoid fever, he passed the Summer at Church Flats, & the Fall among the Myrtles at Sulivans Island, both unhealthy places.
       The Northern Congress has now made Lincoln Dictator, with full powers to call out the Militia, and make money. We have no hope but on our own exertions under Providence to look to. -
March 22
        The successful running the blocade has given a great deal of wealth to some people and there is considerable activity in the selling negroes & City property. Mr Grimball has sold his negroes 48 to Mr G. Trenholm for eight hundred & twenty round some were old & some inferior & some very small children. They all went together & to a kind master which we are very thankful for. I wish he could sell the Plantations too and pay his debts & then get a little farm the desire of his heart. Property has been selling very well.