5 August
        Mrs. Stevens wrote me a note yesterday morning to say that she had permission from her husband to join him at Vicksburg and she would be glad to take letters or a parcel for John so we all wrote letters made them in a packet and gave them to her for she came in the afternoon to see us. This morning she went off on her long journey to reach her husband. I hope she will get there safe, and find them well. I showed her the Ambrotypes of my 5 eldest sons & introduced her to John. -


  We were all very much delighted a few days since by getting a letter from William announcing his change to Fort Sumpter he had received a Commission from Richmond as 2nd Lieutenant in the Calhoun's Artillery, we had given up all expectation of W's getting any thing and I am very glad for us all and particularly for his sake. - There had been so many applications for him and all had so entirely failed. The last was in the Sharp Shooters his name was put down by Gen Evens but the Major's Bing Smith was one made interest to have his name taken off and a friend of their own put in the place. This was a very disagreeable thing and we all felt worried by it, but now if his health is good in our climate there is always a terrible risk in a change and fever seems to lurk in every place. I feel very anxious about him & John. We sent down his trunk and as in this out of the way place there is no express. Adam was sent to Columbia to put the trunk, and a parcel containing the sheets and the key of the trunk in the express, it cost $5. 50 the whole thing. -
19 August
        We have received a long letter from John giving an account of the 3 engagements in which he was in the Arkansas they were most brilliant and the vessel did wonderfully for the Machinery evidently was not of sufficient force to make the vessel effective. The Majestic way in which she moved was as fast as she could go. The end of this was naturally the destruction of the vessel. We are now most anxious to hear from John he
sent us a drawing of the vessel and which he wishes photographed and we saw by the Papers that the last engagement of the poor Arkansas ended in her being blown up by her own crew they all escaped to the shore. -
       Mr & Mrs Vanderhorst are up here for change of air they remained a few days in the Village spent an evening with us, were at the Palmetoe house, and then to the Cherokee Springs. Arnoldus Vanderhorst has had a duel with Alfred Rhett, neither of them hurt, the bench of honor managing the affair.
23 August
        On Tuesday 19 August after Tea, John came to us, having a furlough, to get his clothes. He traveled a long way, and it was a great comfort to see him, but he only remained with us 2 days, he has gone through many perils, and is unhurt, but he returns to the Battery, where he is stationed at Vicksburg, and is very much exposed to the climate. - I felt dreadfully at parting with him, but these are times of such miserable anxiety and there are such family losses, that we have a sort of stunned and bewildered feeling, as if we were all struggling on some dusty tiresome road, and had at long intervals a pleasant meeting, and then our friends passed on, more quickly, and we lost sight of them. The war seems to be as far from its end as ever, and what is to become of us, should it continue?
       Mr & Mrs Vanderhorst stopped here on their way to the Rail Road. Arnoldus was with them he is an unmannerly young man and just now looks miserably having been sick in Virginia. -
  About 3 weeks since, Heyward Manigault paid us a visit of a week occupying Mrs Butler's room next to Papa's. He was very quiet and seemed pleased. Charlotte has written to Elizabeth from Greenville where they are passing the summer that he was very much pleased with his visit and found us very comfortably fixed. He is thinking of establishing himself in Greenville moving his negroes and selling out at Wiltown. -
       Mr Lewis has come up to look for a place to move his negroes & to fix his family. -
       Heyward was very kind in getting me some chimneys for the lamp we burn, in Greenville & sending them by the Stage, - they fit very nicely & got here quite safe. -
       Mr Grimball has bought for William and for Arthur pants up here of domestic cloth very good & sent them down. John took for Mrs Stevens a large bundle for her son, such a one as I should not like to impose upon any one for it took up so much room in his trunk and he was not able to put in his blanket and hope he did not thereby lose it. -
       Miss Becky Carson came to see Ella Lotty & asked the 3 girls to tea. They went and found it very pleasant. Miss Legg called to see them, Mrs Davidson visited us & Mrs McBeth and we have seen something of Abbe Smith, these last are Refugees like ourselves. William & Wharing Mikell came up here to see their Mother & Wh's wife they paid us a visit and told us about the boys, Lewis's Col, Dunavent, is court Marshaled for drunkeness and is in Town to be tried, L thinks of Joining Ferguson's Company of Artillery to go to Tennessee. William they had seen, he
lives at the Fort very comfortably, by their account, Lee keeps a Table d'hote at the Fort, and they all eat with him, - paying $15 per Month.
       Ripley became so Morose when he got to Virginia, that his aids generally resigned. - We have not heard from John but Orders have reached here for him to join the Baltic in Mobile. I am always anxious about him. - August has passed and here is September with no great change in our affairs. - We have no reason to be very much discontented just now we have many comforts, and are well, but the anxiety about absent exposed members of the family continues all the time. William does not write in a way to make one feel happy, he seems disappointed, and that is not pleasant. - Arthur got his pantaloons which were sent to him. Berkley writes in a quiet resigned spirit, which is rather soothing, and Lewis in an affectionate way about his brothers, which we all like Arthur in good spirits, about what surrounds him. -