8 May
        The boat has gone off to Town, and carried our numerous things and some of the servants and Elizabeth, Ella, & Lotty go off on Thursday and we the next day, Lewis takes them down and returns the next day to remain up here until Monday. He is now to be ordered on Coast duty. Bing Smith hopes to be Col. of the Regiment, and Lewis to be Captain, these young men have been all the winter in a state of great expectation and generally disappointed. - I wish they may get something to do, and feel more quiet. The war is arranging its self in and about Washington.
       Virginia has Gen. Lee in charge of her forces. There is not a great desire to fly to her aid, in fact we are all to be subjugated and must first secure our honors. Every thing progresses slowly, but after the success of Sumpter, I hope successfully. The points now to be attacked are all in Virginia except Fort Pickens, in Florida. -
       This is the 3 winter we have passed in this very comfortable establishment and I am I hope sensible of the very great advantage of this for we formerly lived in a rickity old
house; still there was a great deal of happiness there, shewing that being all together & loving each other, secures happiness, independent of wealth. -
       We are to dine at Papa's to day , a last meeting for this season. Papa's case seems to progress in the most uncomfortable manner. He had a conversation with Simons at the Agricultural dinner, which he wished Lewis to witness about, and as L. is friendly with Simonds it was not very pleasant. In this talk Papa spoke in a very irritated way to Simons and in consequence of it he had forbidden any negro to pass through the canal, if they do so, he will punish them. - I think if he had been kept at the North his case would have progressed much better, he does not understand about business, and in not conciliating in his manners. -
Charleston, May 1861.
        We came down on the 10 the Girls & Lewis the day before. All got down comfortably & found them well in Town. - Since that time the servants have been sick one after another, & I have been quite ailing, the house had to be rearranged to accomodate the family. Papa has the front room on the street, a very comfortable one which he seems to enjoy greatly, his servant, Charles, is with him and he looks better than he did in the country but he is an odd person in his manners. He quite ignores William in the Law case and seems rather vexed with him one can't exactly tell for what. I expect the secret of the whole thing is that my
Papa is not very sensible, which he can't help, we are born with an unequal share of mental gifts. -
       The boys are all up stairs in 2 rooms 5 of them, a sort of Barack, but they seem comfortable. Lewis is off on an electioneering effort at Whippy Swamp, to get Bing Smith made Col. that he may be Captain, & so go to war. - Heard from Mrs Butler, she had arrived at her comfortable home and seemed very thankful, gave the girls some pretty worked handkerchiefs, & me a lovely wooden butter tub, the top of which got broken in the Packing. - Elizabeth wrote to her, I think she will get along very comfortably there, her affairs seem very much involved. She wishes Papa to let her Mortgage the Money he has given her, 19 thousand dollars, & 10 thousand dollars, to Papa Lewis & James what she owes them. There was a very good crop harvested, & sold, and one never can understand this business. - We have seen Luise North, Marianna Petigru, Mrs C. Manigault, Harriet, Margaret Barnwell, & Ann, Dr Porcher, the Wilkinses, all of them, and are getting into the usual rutine of the summer.
       We have not been able to get a pew in St. Michael's Church this summer as yet and may as well give it up. The old lady we generally hire from goes down to the Island and Gen. Boregard objects to people going there as the Island is under Martial law. -
25 [May]
        John went off this morning in the Cecile to join the Lady Davis at Beaufort, he packed up his things in my room,
and seemed very much pleased with his position. He got a new trunk, and placed his clothes in good order. When I advised some particular course of conduct he informed me he was 21, and felt quite able to take care of himself. Papa and himself act like red rags on one another.
       Lewis has not succeeded in getting his commission, Bing Smith is still Captain, and Lewis Lieutenant, he is in Town and seems desirous of improving himself in his profession. - Arthur is the only one we feel very anxious about just now, the whole family life must greatly surprise Papa. So much ease of intercourse between Parents and children. -