10th October
        We went to Church on Communion Sunday
and saw Miss Clemy Legg in deep black what a pity the poor thing was not married to Mr Palmer. -
       Papa talks of going down to his Plantation to settle his affairs. If he has to move his negroes he will send them to Georgia to Richard. I told him if he had no further need to be on his place that we should be very glad to have him stay with us and that I had enjoyed his being with us this Summer. He said he felt very grateful for all the kindness shewn him and would always remember it. - That it was pleasant to think of. -
       Elizabeth had a nice little visit to Miss Juliet and rode to Glen Springs. When she returned she took cold and had a sore throat the Dr visited her and used costic for her throat with success. -
       Mr Wilkins's man Edward went off. - Mrs & Miss Stone came to see us some time since, and when we returned the visit Miss Stone told Elizabeth the reason they visited us was they belonged to the way side Hospital, and a German of the 1st Infantry came up here on furlough for recruiting and spoke so much of Lewis's kindness to the men. He said he bought a wagon load of chickens and gave them to the sick soldiers, and when he went to Town to purchase medicine he paid for it himself, if he had not money enough allowed. -
       Lewis has now changed to Fergusons Light Battery and I think he finds it rather dull. These way side Hospitals are very great Charities. The ladies of this place hire a large room
& place beds in it as many as the space will allow and 2 ladies have charge each week send every day to the Rail Road and provide 3 meals. This war has brought out all over the land beautiful instances of true charity blessing and being blessed.
24th October
        Papa has determined to go to his Plantation early in November, and I am quite reconciled to his going because he always moves at this season, and because it is now difficult to get what he likes to eat, if he cannot remain on his place he will return to us. We will have to remain up here, I suppose all Winter. The difficulty of getting supplies increases and now we shall be without Butter and soon I suppose the Cow will go dry.
       We have a number of servants to feed and there seems a prospect of not getting corn. We wrote for Rice but it has not been sent as there is none in Town. Mr Grimball has given $50 to the Hospital in Richmond $100 to the relief of those who suffered by the fire in Charleston and all subscriptions brought to the house are responded to, $5 or $4 or $3. to the supplying clothes for the soldiers or a hospital. We have no income, and are in a fair way of getting to the end of what we have, in this state of things, he earnestly desires to subscribe to the free Market, to other demands upon the liberality of the public, but I tell him he has first to consider his own family. The papers have been filled with heart rending accounts of the needs of our soldiers in the field their shoeless, and bleeding feet their rags the cold
nights, no blankets. Since the war began the efforts of private charity have been directed to the soldiers and we hear that in their rapid Marches they are forced to throw away their clothes blankets &c and how can they be supplied. The South Carolina troops are said to be the most destitute.
       Heyward Manigault is going to his Plantation in that way he avoids Military duty his family are to remain in Greenville.
       Berkley & Arthur have had second attacks of fever. W. is trying to get Arthur in the Signal Company. John writes from Mobile that the Naval Officers are greatly excited by the new plan of promoting for Meritorious conduct and not as in the old way according to rank. It is not thought this is rendering justice.