June 25
        Mr Grimball still in Town but expected to day, he sent me a letter from Mary Wilcocks about Mrs McAllister, Mrs Butler's daughter. Her health is in such a critical state that it was thought proper to inform her Mother. She was dreadfully distressed, and at once said she would be glad to go on to the North to see her daughter. - Mr Grimball will go with her to Richmond to get her through. - if possible. This breaks up our pleasant housekeeping, but I am very glad we are here and able to have Papa with us, for he is very feeble, and much changed by his troubles and his age. -
       Mr Wilkins is fortunate in getting a small house containing 4 rooms for $15 per Month where she will live with her daughters more comfortably, and she thinks more reasonably, than boarding. -
       Gabriella and Charlotte were confirmed in Charleston just before we left there and last Sunday it being Communion Sunday I had the great comfort of having my 3 daughters with me
partaking of that Sacrament. - I pray that they may earnestly walk in a Christian life.
       The Battle near Richmond is a glorious victory for us we have met with great losses in the lives of valuable young men but this with the signal repulse on James Island are very telling in shortening the war. - Letters from Mr Grimball from Richmond, Mrs Butler still there hoping to get through. The Rail Road had been torn up and if she succeeds in getting through she will have to ride two days in a carriage to Fredricksburg. -
       We are getting on here well enough I think now we need not have left Charleston at all, but the Change will be of great service to all of us and already has done Gabriella a great deal of good. William has made another unsuccessful effort to obtain a Commission that way to distinction is evidently closed to him, and we may just as well reconcile ourselves to it. I feel very anxious about John, he wrote to his Father asking for money and was sent a letter containing $50. which he never received and as he was put to inconvenience by it we are quite annoyed. -
       He was at Atlanta Georgia getting Ordinance stores for the Gun Boat. -