May 15
        Mr Grimball sent Adam to Columbia to bring the box to us. We have now opened it and find 2 pieces of beautiful long cloth, 18 yds white cambric, 2 doz spools of white cotton, 1 do black, 6 papers pins, a large supply of needles put up in a glass bottle, 1 piece linnen , 4 dresses, black poplin cloth for a suit for Mr Grimball 28 yds. white flannel, a hat for Mr G. shoes, high & thick soled & slippers 2 pair shoes for Harry, 1 pair for each of the girls, & 1 for me & 3 pair of slippers for the girls. The shoes are rather tight but very much needed, and we feel how kind and sensible this good child has been in his selections. I have sent 9 yds of long cloth, 3 yds. linnen , 3 yds. flannel, 2 papers pins, 2 spools cotton, 1 paper needles to the Wilkinses. John said he wished them sent sent something if we could spare it out of the box.
       I gave each of the women servants a yd of long cloth to make an apron & 1 yd to Adam; to Mrs Irwin our land lady I gave a half paper small pins do large, 2 yds long cloth, 1 yd flannel for her baby.
       This long cloth costs now $8 per yd if not more,
flannel must be from $10 to 15, linnen $25 per yard. Shoes such as we have $75 a pair, spool cotton $2 for one. I am very thankful as John did send us these things they got to us safe, so many people lose their boxes. The Church has been Consecrated, & the Council has met here. John Elliott staid with us, a very pleasant visit, he is a pious & successful M. preacher in Anderson, where he has a Church. -
22 [May]
        The Battles in Virginia are so far successful for us and Johnston in Georgia appears to be acting on the defence with skill, at least we hope so. He has given up some places, the Yankees file their papers with his, and we hope this Summer through the blessing of God, to arrive at a peace. The long Winter is at last over, and the Summer here. I think this a very pleasant Summer climate.
       The shoos are all too narrow, Harry's entirely too small but we are stretching them, they are too nice to give up. -
       Received a letter from John dated 31 March containing his Photograph. It is very nicely done, but looks thinner & older than when we last saw him. -
       The Frosts party was quite a pleasant one, and the girls returned Saturday afternoon. E says the bride looked better teaching the mutes than now. There is a second rate air about the whole concern very striking comparing them with the Frosts. She paid the bride a visit on Saturday morning and said a little child playing on the floor looked very much like Mrs