9 Sep
        Mr Grimball took his nieces to Camden and placed them comfortably in their lodgings he arrived here on Saturday and looked sad and worne by all the anxiety he has gone through. He feels the death of his sister very much she was a most gentle and Christian woman. -
       There was a Confirmation here on the 30 August and Mr Grimball was confirmed, and took Communion. We thought the voice of the Bishop, when he put his hands on Mr Grimball, was most tender, in its tone. This is a most comfortable thing for me; ever since my marriage 32 years ago Mr Grimballs not being a member of the Church has been a trouble to me, & now that in spite of his prejudices, he has joined the Episcopal Church, I consider this the answer to my prayers. He now sets the best example to his sons & they who revere & love him will certainly follow. -
       We have gone through a great deal of anxiety about the continuance of our residence here, the Place has been sold
and for some time we thought by the 1 of January we might be entirely with out a home, but now for another year we are to continue here, tenants of Mr Irwin, at the same rate. The difficulty of living is very great, but Mr White is kind to us, and we get on. -
       The papers to day state that Morris Island is Evacuated, although expecting this I felt shocked when it was a fact. - Arthur was there in Battery Wagner at the time. William until very lately was in Fort Sumter and on one occasion rubish fell on him & covered him up. William Mikel who was standing near thought him killed but he fortunately escaped unhurt. -
       Papa continues very much in the same state. -
September 20
        There has been a very brave & successful repulse of an attack on Fort Sumter. The Artillery have been moved from the Fort & an Infantry Company, the Charleston Batallion put there & Major Stephen Elliott placed in command it is said they took the flag that used to be on the Fort, & Major Anderson was permitted to take with them. -
       Every thing is now tending to a battle in the West. - As there were no longer any guns to man in Fort Sumter the Artillery were placed in different batteries William's company are at Fort Ripley a warf in the middle of the harbour or rather near Fort Sumter, they have a boat to live in & find it very disagreeable. We saw yesterday the death of Mrs Alice Heyward, the war I expect has killed her. I have know her so long & always
liked her that I feel very much shocked. -
       Berkley has gone to Fort Johnston, with the Marions. Last night W. Carson came here to pay a visit he stays too long. - but it is civil his calling this is the 4th or 5th visit. -
Sep 29
        Our success in the West is very gratifying, & much needed to keep up the drooping spirits. Every paper contains accounts of the donations to the Hospitals, & it is wonderful & affecting to see whar little things are sent, combs, tooth brushes, a banjo, a bunch of herbs, a roll of rag, every thing that any one can spare: or has. -