February 1862.
        Lewis has recovered after an illness of 3 weeks. We nursed him faithfully and people were very kind in asking about him, he has now passed his examination before the board here & is waiting for orders, in the meantime has gone in the country to pay a visit to his friend Sinclair, on the 10th he will receive his orders. John has had two bilious attacks, now better. Charles and Clementina gone to Savannah where he is now on duty & her brothers are there too. Mr Grimball has paid several visits to the City & brought Adam down to assist in nursing Lewis. - We were fortunate that Lewis went before this board, for Dr Giddings was one of the Surgeons and when it was through and Lewis had left the room with the intimation that he was to return the next day to be informed how he stood they called him back and told him he had passed, this I think he owed to the kindness of Dr Giddings, who knew how ill he had been. We have reason to be very thankful for all this and I hope now he will earnestly devote himself to his profession. -
       John is here in charge of the Lady D, & the Gun boat: he would rather be in Savannah where there is a prospect of some service. -
27th Feb.
        All the boys except W. are now out again, B & A joined the Marion Artillery and Lewis the 1[?] Regiment Infantry as Assist Surgeon quite distinguished with his uniform &c. William
still unfixed. Lotty and Ella & Harry have had the Measles are now better. Things are very dark just now & for ourselves ruin seems pretty certain. The whole Country seems to be abandoned to the enemy and the troops are to be concentrated in Charleston & Savannah. The Episcopal Churches are open for prayer and we have had in succession two fast days last Friday and this. Thy will be done is the prayer and when we really feel so there is some comfort. John is in Savannah in command of 5 guns living in a Flat and highly delighted with his situation.
       The Militia of the City was disbanded and is still in an unorganized state. William has applied for a regular Commission, and is still uncertain of getting it. Berkley & Arthur joined the Marion Artillery as the most agreeable Company being composed of gentlemen. -
       I dare not think of the consequences or this war, our ruin and the loss of my brave boys but we are sadly in earnest, and I pray we may succeed. -