1 September
        Lewis arrived from Virginia and went up that night to see about his Commission. He returned yesterday, having been obliged to wait several days to see the Governor. He had companions, for there were many there waiting for the same purpose. He returned having received his Commission he is to apply to the Surgeon General or some such person and then he will go some where. I think upon the whole it is the best, as he will be in the line of his profession. -
       He looks well and upon the whole I think it has not
injured him. He says it was the life of a hound and all the evil selfish feelings brought out. In this Palmetoe Guard one day Capn Cuthbert would be very pleasant & easy with the men and soon after, like a raging lion. Many shirked duty[,] lied, stole, and others had to work all the time because they stayed in Camp and were quiet, many of the flourishing tales we heard of prowes on the battle field were made up for home. What poor creatures we all are!
       Heard from Papa he says Charles writes to him. Judge Law wrote to Mrs Butler she must come South. P. Butler is in Fort Lafayete New York Harbour, a prisoner. Mr Wharton her Phila lawyer is also in prison. Julian McAllister is promoted to be Captain in the U.S. forces. Mrs McAllister is with her Mother with her 2 younger children. - Ann Barnwell has an admirer in Lionel Nowel he is a clerk, gets 15 hundred a year & is said to be a very gentlemanly man.
       The Troops are said to be still suffering from fevers, &c., in Virginia. The Hospitals I expect are under the charge of inexperienced Surgeons. After the Battle we heard that the legs and arms were sawed off and thrown out of doors & windows and many lives lost from ignorance. Lewis has brought home a Dressing Gown taken from a Yankee's trunk a pistol a bowy knife a picture of a little Yankee girl.
       After a great many delays Lewis got his appointment
and the next day at 7 o'clock went off to Cole's Island where some troops are stationed. We fixed him up and now it is proposed that Lewis should to applied for a Confederate appointment from Walker. - Mr Grimball is to write a letter to that effect I suppose nothing will come of it but one can but try. - Striving is the appointed way. - We made 4 calico shirts for Lewis and fixed him up as well as we could. We have constant rains now. Lewis said with regard to the Camp life that men did there what they would be ashamed to do at home.
15 [September]
        Heard from Lewis he is satisfied finds a friend in one of the Lieutenants, Tatum, an old schoolmate from Abeville has one hundred and 50 men under his charge and a very good Hospital Steward who saves him much trouble. The letters to Walker are not answered, one from Elizabeth to Mrs W. who was an old friend at school.
       The Marion Artilary have been ordered down to Sulivan's Island. Martin who is now Lieutenant & Berkley W. are with this Company, B. as Commissary they seemed to like it very much. Martin had to purchase a sword and gave in this time of scarcity for an Army sword $40. - the usual price it $15 $20 with belt & chains. The war progresses very slowly and as yet it looks very dark and endless. A must trust in the Good God who has protected us so far. -
19 Sep
        My dear Lotty has had an attack of fever now for 3 or 4 days Dr Geddings says Typhoid which is always lingering. She is the most patient child never says a word and takes
her medicine and is still. -