Wednesday July 1st. / '63.
        I have neglected my journal for so long that I do not know now where to begin, there is so much to write. A day or two after Mrs. Stone left, we had an application to board some one--even the fashionable Mrs. Amos or rather the rich Mrs. Amos and daughter and two servants. Mother refused of course, they are staying with Mrs. Dawson, a friend, and they have a place in Jackson parish, and are not distressed in any way. Our intercourse with them has not been very pleasant. The first time I saw Miss Amos was the morning she called here with her Mother to get board, I thought her agreeable and sensible, when I called on her, as usual, I was less pleased; she has not returned my call and I suppose will not do so. Monday night I was invited to spend the evening there, at first I wrote a note declining,
but afterwards at Mother's advice destroyed that and accepted. I was quite sorry that I did not adhere to my original decision, I arrived there when the moon was shining brightly, just at that charming hour when moonlight and twilight mingle, but the young ladies were at the toilette, I remained alone about fifteen minutes when Mrs. Amos and Virginia returned from a ride and gave me the pleasure of their company for nearly an hour, when Dr. Strother and Lieut. Murdock drove up, in a short time the young ladies appeared, one after another, almost forgot to bid me good evening, and occupied themselves no more with my entertainment, there were no other young ladies there except myself, Carrie Young had been invited but was away from home and of course did not come. There were six gentlemen there from town, and the evening passed away tolerably. I do not think that I shall ever accept another invitation at that house, or visit except very formally.
        The wife and daughter of Captain Jesse Smith were here yesterday and the night before, they left this morning. Appear honest, good and frank hearted people, but Oh so fat, Miss Smith weighs two hundred and fifty pounds, and is only seventeen! she is really immense, and it is a actual fat too, I pity the poor (?) girl, she feels it too, they invited me very cordially to come up and pay them a visit, perhaps I may; they are very comfortably established with fine orchards, garden and everything around them, but still there is a certain magnetic repulsion which makes me shrink from the thought of spending my time in their company; this shrinking from anything coarse or inelegant in mind or manners is so strong in me that I don't think I can ever overcome it, I have too great a love for elegant
surroundings, and am in danger of confounding the spiritual with the merely earthly and so letting the earthly triumph. This morning we went to Major Waddell's to attend the funeral of his baby and his brother's, but in consequence of some mistake in the coffins, it was deferred till this evening. It was a sweet and affecting sight, the two little frail forms lying side by side in angelic repose, a veil of white thrown over them hid whatever was disagreeable in their features, all was beautiful and peaceful, one could imagine them soaring thence to heaven; the two little cousins, both girls, were nearly the same age, affected by the same symptoms and died within twenty four hours of each other. Mrs. Dr. Waddell was quite resigned, but her sister law grieved much for the departed little one. Mrs. Morancy and Mrs. Bowmar Barr went to the funeral this evening, the other two ladies remained there all day, I returned home this morning with a violent headache which was just going off when they left so I did not accompany them. Willie returned from the salt works last Thursday after an absence of a week. Yesterday he and Loring went to the flour mills at Downsville, sixteen miles from here, to get our wheat ground, but the mill was out of order and could not grind this week, so they returned today.
        We have not had any school for the past two weeks, first on account of Father's return, and last week because we expected Mrs. Barr to leave daily and Mother said I had better not have school, but I shall endeavour to commence next Monday. Father has been spending every other day for more than a week in the blacksmith shop, one day he is president of the road, the next takes up his old familiar trade, he is repairing the wagons and the carriage, getting everything ready in case we should have to move. We
have not yet heard any decisive news from Vicksburg, there was a great victory reported to have taken place there, but we have not yet heard it confirmed and consequently can place no reliance on it. We had a sick soldier with us all last week, or rather a convalescent, he was an honest, quiet and modest person, seldom conversed, but was very sensible, his name was John Scott. The man who brought him here said he was a good and faithful soldier never lagging or feigning sickness, he expressed a great desire to get back to the army--
Saturday, July 4th / 63.
        I really had forgotten, or rather had not thought, that this was the eventful fourth until I wrote the date of this entry; alas we have no time now to celebrate the birthday of a liberty which we had nearly lost and are now struggling so hard to maintain. I have heard nothing of any celebration today, we have little heart for it now, little heart for any joy even the purest, which brings so powerfully to our minds the glorious past but is at the time associated with thoughts of our bitterest foes.
        Mr. Scott returned day before yesterday, he was taken sick again and looked almost as badly as when he first came. But I must note the extraordinary event which took place yesterday. About half past twelve o'clock we were all sitting down quietly in the hall sewing, braiding palmetto, busy in a great many ways, in fact we were so busy talking and working that we did not as usual hear the gate latch or the rolling of wheels until Loring ran up saying "here's an ambulance, here's the staff!" We were indeed surprised, they came up so suddenly that we had no time to dress at all. Mother
was dressed in a purple morning gown trimmed with white, very pretty and neat, but not fit to receive gentlemen in, we all looked quite as well as could be expected but if we had not, there was no help for it, for before we were aware of their neighbourhood the ambulance had stopped and the elegant Major Mason was approaching the door. Mother had only time to whisper "and Major Mason too!" as she advanced to receive him, he was accompanied by Capt. Gault and Capt. French, the last a nephew of my favorite the Major, I was very sorry he had not come instead of the nephew. Of course Mother, the housekeeper, thought at once of her dinner, expecting of course they would remain, under this mistaken idea she came out into the hall when they had been there about half an hour and asked "if the gentlemen would not like to wash their faces after their dusty ride" the poor gentlemen were much embarrassed, I dare say they thought their faces were dirty. Major Mason recovered himself with his usual quickness, and jumping up said in a rather flurried manner "thank you ma'am, as far as I am concerned it would give me a great deal of pleasure," poor Capt. Gault thought he must follow, in his excitement be rose, hemmed and blushed, looked first at Major Mason and then at Mother, and then swung off to the room behind Maj. M. and Capt. French. It was really a most amusing thing, to think they should have dressed up in their best, Maj. Mason especially in clean, starched and trimmed shirt, buttoned with costly and beautiful studs, his hair brushed just so, and particularly parted behind, fine ring on his finger, and his whole person redolent of perfumes, and withal a face cleansed or every spec, and in this toilet come to call on the ladles and indulging in a fine flow of eloquence, to be asked unceremoniously to wash
his face, no wonder he was surprised out of his usual elegant self possession, but Mother was perfectly innocent, his toilet was lost on her, she asked him to wash his face as if he had been a common soldier. I dare say they had a good laugh when they reached the cool seclusion of my room, my room too, only think of it. I was really provoked when I saw them filing in. Notwithstanding this little mistake, their visit was very pleasant; a few minutes before dinner was announced they rose to go, but we asked them to remain to dinner and they very readily consented, and remained some time after. I enjoyed their visit a good deal particularly as it was quite a surprise and a very unusual thing too, novelty gives zest to anything. I was really surprised as well as gratified during their visit by a little episode which displayed Capt. Gault's character in a more favourable light than I had before regarded it, this was as follows, we were speaking of the wounded soldiers in Monroe and their desperate condition, deprived as some are, of both hands or both legs, I said I had rather die than live thus, yes he said, if mortal hopes and pleasures were only to be consulted, but the question would always rise what must come after death. So entirely unexpected was this from one whose character I had conceived to be so dissolute and thoughtless as his, that I could scarcely answer, he went on to say that it was a feeling so deeply implanted in a man's heart by his Mother that he could never forget it, that it was the one remembrance of a Mother's teaching which he had never cast off, but which often returned to his, and the more bitterly as he had no doubt what his final destination would be, this last was said in a light tone as if ashamed of his former seriousness, but when he brushed his hand over his eyes and forehead I


thought they were not very calm; though he soon returned to subjects of conversation both distasteful and uninteresting to me. I think that he is perhaps a man of really good mind and originally good feelings but in conversation with young ladies feels himself obliged to conceal the former by a display of dissipated frivolity; as to the latter, his good feelings appear to have been either perverted or smothered by frequent disappointments and by a life that has been by no means pure. Oh how soon I have learned the sad lesson that sin is indeed in the world, I would I were innocent of this knowledge, Oh for the spotless purity and ignorance of Hawthorne's white souled Hilda! I have learned the bitter lesson too soon and too well, the sin of Adam presses sorely upon me, I cannot read the story of his fall without sadness, almost tears.
        It makes me sad to think of the situation of our country, particularly of poor Louisiana at this time. There seems too be no law or order on this side the Mississippi, all is in confusion. Father is now involved in a controversy between civil law and military tyranny. A week or two ago, Capt. Oliver, the commisary at Monroe, sent word to Father that the cars must leave early Sunday morning to carry some necessaries to the camp at Delhi. This was not the day for the cars and Father went up to see Capt. Oliver, ascertained that the provisions were not ready and that it was not necessary they should be sent until the regular train day, he then explained to the commissary that the railroad and the engines were wearing out, that they could not bear a daily train and finally that he could not send it out, about nine o'clock they sent a courier out here with an order to send the train or the railroad would be pressed. Father remained firm to what he
considered his duty; and that night they did press the road, Mr. McGuire refused to serve them, they threatened him with arrest; Mr. Myrick and Mr. McKinney, the engineer, were told to run the train or go into the conscript camp, they chose the former; but the commissary soon tired of his bargain, the train went down Sunday, but none of the indispensable articles were carried, and during the day seven messengers were sent to Mr. McGuire to prevail on him to receive the railroad again, he told them that as they had no right to take it, so they had no right to deliver it to him, but finally said that if it was abandoned he might take possession, it was immediately abandoned. Father instituted a legal process against the seizure which has no warrant in either civil or military law. No man is willing to do more for his country, or to sacrifice more for it than my Father, but no man is more firm in resisting tyranny or maintaining those rights which make our country dear. Last week the trains had gone to Delhi to bring Walker's division to Monroe, but on receiving a contradictory order from General Smith they were to disembark. Col. Randall, commanding a brigade in the division, sent a peremptory order to the conductor to back down, he replied that would do so as soon as the train was ready, but the engineer said in a low tone, not meant for the ears of the official, "We don't obey Gen'l Randall here, if he had requested us to back down we would have done it," this idle speech was reported to Gen'l Randall and he had McKinney put in irons and lodged in the jail, saying that he should remain there for the rest of the war. Was not this an outrage on liberty? I heard however that Gen'l Walker had ordered the man to be released but yesterday he was still in jail, and Mr. Ray had gone down to compel his release as an officer
of the civil law. Father was very angry when he heard of this tyrannical proceeding, he was indignant that such should have happened in our own country, it reminds us of Lincoln's proceedings.--
Tuesday July 7th / '63.
        Mrs. Noble and Annie paid us a visit yesterday, they stayed all night and left this morning, Annie is growing to be quite a pretty girl.
        Last night twenty soldiers, recruits from Texas to Walker's division, camped at our gate, they came up to borrow cooking utensils. Mrs. Bowmar Barr was playing on the piano quite late, and three of them came up to hear some music! it was such a good trait in their characters, I thought. Like all the soldiers we have ever met they seem well behaved. We hear bad news from Vicksburg, some say that it has fallen, some that it is about to fall, I can only hope and trust; Oh God, desert us not in this our extremity! All is dark and uncertain, we cannot look into the gloomy future even a day. Willie and his wagons leave for Shreveport today, they are going for coffee and also to take some wheat to mill at Minden, not far this side of Shreveport. Loring begged so hard to go with Willie that Mother consented, he seems to anticipate a great deal of pleasure on the road, it is a new thing to him. Father has gone into Monroe today, but will be in the blacksmith's shop tomorrow, he keeps working steadily, putting all the vehicles in running order, in case we should have to become refugees in our turn.-- Mrs. Compton and Maggie paid us a visit yesterday afternoon, Julia was out riding and stopped to see me, I really envied her when I saw her galloping by, I have not mounted Mollie for a month or more, her back is healed up
now, and I am only waiting for the hair to grow out well before I commence riding her again, I dare say I shall have a hard struggle with her at first, she has been so long running wild, and this is not necessary for she is never tame.
Thursday July 9th. / '63.
        Willie and Loring left for Shreveport Tuesday, we miss them very much indeed, it seems like a week since they left, it is hard to bid anyone goodbye in these times. Mrs. Barr, Mrs. Morancy and Miss Julia left us yesterday morning to visit Mrs. Mahier, a friend of theirs in Jackson parish, they expect to return Saturday, our family is very small now and the house feels lonesome. Mr. Scott is still here, he improves but slowly. We were very busy yesterday finishing an organdie dress which Miss Kate Stone gave me, it looks very pretty and is very becoming to me. There were some tableaux and charades last night in town, given by the young ladies for the benefit of the hospital, Mrs. Stevens invited Miss Mary and I to stay all night at her house, but we had no way to go. Father is busy working at the carriage again today, he has nearly finished it.
Thursday night.
        Vicksburg has fallen, Vicksburg, our hope and pride! Oh, it is terrible; we would not believe it until today, but now it seems certain. Oh God, have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, all is dark, all hearts are sad, this is the worst blow we have had. We hear that it was surrendered on Saturday morning at ten o'clock, the fourth of July, hereafter a day of mourning and humiliation to us, of redoubled exultation to our hated enemies. Oh, it is
bitter after all our confidence thus to have the Yankees threats and prophecies fulfilled. They say that our soldiers had no bread for two months, and lived on mule's flesh for a month before the surrender. I do not know what is true, but it is all the fault of Gen'l Pemberton and his subordinates, one thing we know, Vicksburg is gone, that is enough.
Sunday, July 12th.
        A soldier is here from Vicksburg, left there on parole on the eighth, says the city surrendered for want of provisions, a mule was killed for meat to his knowledge, he says. Oh I am bowed to the dust with humiliation when I think of it. My God, my God why hast thou forsaken us, I cannot be resigned to thy will in this, it is too hard, our pride, our bulwark is gone, this is the end of our confidence and boasting. And it is the fault of our own Generals, well may every true patriot execrate the name of Pemberton. The Yankees are advancing on Delhi, our forces are preparing to fight them. Oh for victory. All is dark, I cannot look ahead. I shudder to think of the future. Should the Confederacy fall I feel I can never know joy again, but it cannot, must not fall, we fight for honour, liberty, life itself, we shall yet redeem our name, our former glorious name. Only this morning the calm brightness of the Sabbath invigorated my saddened soul. I trusted in God and I will yet trust in him from whom cometh my salvation.
Thursday, July 16th. 1863.
        Mrs. Barr and family returned Monday morning, they found Eva sick with
diptheria, she was taken Saturday evening with sore throat but she so often has it that we thought nothing of it, but Sunday she was so sick that we sent for the doctor, he pronounced it the dreaded diptheria. Eva was very much frightened and allowed him to cauterize her throat and took the medicine he left without any resistance, yesterday evening the doctor said her throat was much better, she has the disease in a very mild form. Little Jim was taken with it Tuesday, has it quite badly, I hope it will not spread among the little children. Mrs. Morancy was so much alarmed for Jennie that she took her down to Mrs. Waddell's. Miss Julia is there too, so we have only Mrs. Barr with us. Our salt wagons arrived Tuesday noon, said Willie and Loring were well when they left there, all the government stores are being hauled from Monroe, so the wagons did not return, and we expect Willie and Lory the last of this week, I am very anxious to see them. Yesterday Miss Mary and I packed the books. Oh it was a sad work to me, it brought forcibly to my mind all the hopes, the bright golden dreams I had indulged in here, and which were, many of them, connected with these books. I had thought I should never again have the melancholy task of packing them. Oh my home, my dear home how can I leave it, it seems as if it would break my heart, and I know I shall never return, never see this place except as the dwelling of another, it may be an illusion but in my eyes it is a beautiful place, and I had projected so many improvements. And than the bitterest thought of all is Vicksburg, had it not been for this we need not have left home, but gladly would I have gone if this bitter humiliation could have been spared us. Miss Mary and the children look forward with bright anticipations to their journey to Texas
and residence in San Antonio de Bexar, but I have no bright anticipations, usually so fond of weaving bright joys in the future I cannot now look forward, a mist shuts in my mind like the mist which has hung over our hills for several days, only the past is ever present with me. I know these feelings are wrong, how many have suffered more than we have, Mrs. Barr for instance, deprived of her two sons, the one her pride and stay, the other her pet and darling, her daughter a widow, her surviving son with no talent for business and little energy, she has lost much of her property and knows not where to go or what to do, we are still united, I feel this blessing and am thankful.
Saturday, July 18th. 1863.
        Georgie, my darling, was taken yesterday evening with the diptheria, we sent immediately for the doctor but he could not come till late, and as Georgie was asleep and had no fever he would not disturb him to look at his throat, I hope he will come early this morning; Father was not at all well yesterday, retired before supper. We had a joyful surprise yesterday in the return of Willie and Loring, it was very unexpected indeed, Willie returned immediately from Shreveport, he could not get any coffee except at six dollars a pound by the sack, they would not sell a smaller quantity, so he did not get any, not knowing what a panic might be in Monroe by the time he returned. Major MaClay and Major Mason called to see us last night, Major Maclay as usual was very entertaining notwithstanding he was suffering from neuralgia in the face, he told me some very
interesting things about Texas and San Antonio which I shall lay up in my memory. Father did not see the gentlemen as he had retired and was so unwell. Julia Willson and Tabitha Scarborough called here yesterday evening on their return from a horseback ride, I was very glad to see them, they are on the eve of moving to Homer and thence to Texas. I shall be very sorry to part with them, I have few such pleasant acquaintances this side of the Mississippi, but we are going so soon it matters little, I dare say we will meet again in some of our wanderings.
Monday, July 20th.
        Georgie's throat was very much inflamed but proved not to be the diptheria, he is as well as usual now. The doctor is here this morning at work at Jim's throat; he says it is not necessary to cauterize Eva's throat again, she is fast getting well, sat up all day yesterday, and is up and dressed this morning, but she looks badly and is still careful of her diet. We took a ride in the carriage Saturday evening, principally to give Eva an airing, it was delightful riding, as we returned home Miss Carrie Young and Capt. Gault, Virginia Dawson and Capt. Smith on horseback overtook us, we did not see the last couple, but Carrie and her cavalier seemed enjoying themselves highly. Father had a fever yesterday and sent for the doctor, but he was sick and could not come, this morning he is up though feeling badly, and Mother gave him a dose of medicine before the doctor came.
        The troops from the convalescent camp passed here yesterday, there were
seven here at different meals through the day, in the evening two surgeons called in, their pretext was a drink of water, but they stayed some time after they had gotten it, one was Dr. Head, who called here one night for supper while the troops were camped at Trenton the first time. The troops are going by today, I hear some wagons passing now. They are in different health and different spirits from when they passed before, no wonder, poor fellows! Mr. Scott was here to dinner yesterday, said be was no better than when he left.
Sunday, July 26th. / 1863.
        Today I have had once more the pleasure of hearing the service and an excellent sermon from the lips of an episcopal minister, Mr. Lawson of Bastrop. Mrs. Dortch told us last week that he was to preach at Monroe today, and I was of course anxious to go. Miss Mary, Eva, Willie, Loring and I went in, it was exceedingly dusty and very warm, but I was amply repaid for the long and wearisome ride for the pleasure I had in Church, it is the first time in more than two years since I have been in any Church but this one here, and my emotion amounted almost to pain as the impressive service commenced and the music of the melodeon, how sweet and solemn! The text was, "What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visiteth him," and well was it treated. Oh, how I felt my own nothingness, my selfishness and vanity while I listened, and more than all these I felt the grace and mercy of God, grace of which I am so unworthy. I caught a very bad cold on Friday, and feared I should not be well enough to go, but this morning when I rose I was surprised and thankful to find my head free from pain and my cold almost gone.


  Rose was taken with the diptheria yesterday, I hope she will not have it badly, she is very patient, a great contrast to Jim, who will not allow any thing to be done for him except by force, he is very sick and very sullen, he is extremely reduced, looks dreadfully. John is not at all well, he either has a very bad cold or some kind of cough.
        Mr. Lawson said today that the hand of God was above this dark war cloud hovering over us, and that it is he and not man who controuls the fury of the tempest, I know it, and I will trust in him, surely he will deliver us and if not, if it be his will to take from us what is dearer than home, friends, or life itself, our country, can I not believe that Our Father doeth all things well. I will try thus to believe, Oh, Lord, help thou mine unbelief!
Tuesday, July 28th / '63.
        This morning the two wagons left for Marshall, one loaded with my piano and the books and the other with railroad things. Mr. Burks, a railroad overseer went with them, Father will follow in a day or two, to find some place of deposit for the things. I had hoped never to have seen them moved again, but all these hopes are now dashed to the ground, the books were never put upon the shelves intended for them. All is so uncertain, where will they be unpacked? If Father carries out his scheme of sending us all over to Germany we shall not have a home soon again, this idea of going to Germany is terrible to me, to be separated from Father and Willie and from Valeria, I am separated from her now, it is true, but not by oceans. Oh, if I could only see her before we leave home, or if I could
but hear from her.
        Jenny Morancy is very sick, I hope she may be spared to her afflicted Mother.
Thursday night, July 30th.
        Poor little Jim died this evening, without pain and almost imperceptibly the spirit passed to Him who gave it, his body lies still and cold in the room where he suffered, and the singing of the watchers now sounds solemnly there, how closely are life and death bound together, death is ever near, the thought fills me with no alarm for myself, but for those so near to me it is dreadful. How much we feel our own littleness when we see the breath dying out of the body, but now so full of life, no man can save his brother, here mortal love and anguish are of no avail.