Wednesday, Aug. 3rd.
        My worst fears for Willie's health were realized yesterday, my poor brother is sick at Columbia, and wrote up for Father to send the ambulance and a mattress for him, he has chills and fever. He wrote that he was quite sick, but the fact that it was written by another person, for him, makes us very anxious, we cannot expect him till tomorrow at the soonest, sent immediately yesterday evening. Father would have gone but thought it better for Willie to have all the room. George had a fever all day yesterday and last night, we were alarmed by an eruption which appeared on his body, sent for Dr. White early this morning, who said the fever was caused by a severe cold and the eruption was nettle rash, we have only to be careful that the rash does not strike in. A negro child near here broke out with it last week, it's Mother perceiving it, washed it in cold water and in ten minutes the child was a corpse!
        Mrs. Stone and Kate arrived yesterday morning, Mrs. Stone had been to her place and to Millikens bend, was rejoiced to get out safe, found the old negroes she left on her place faithful, and that they had taken care of her silver, she brought out a few pieces, gave the rest to a yankeeized southern lady at the bend. Mrs. Stone got a few goods, could not get either tea or coffee, says greenbacks are rapidly depreciating. She brought out a quantity of new songs, books and magazines, the fashions are perfect curiosities to us, so much changed. Mrs. Stone also brought a large packet
of papers, containing much interesting news, an account of the fight between the Alabama and the Kearsage, one by Winslow, one by Semmes, both of which agree tolerably, also a full account of one raid into Maryland which was entirely successful and frightened the Yankees to death, this is glad news but oh we have so much cause for solicitude, in one of the papers there is a long article from the Georgia Constitutionalist which gives a fair and frank statement of our situation both in Virginia and Georgia, this situation is very critical, it fills me with anxiety, but I trust that the skilfullness of our Generals and the bravery of our troops will yet save our Capitol. Father says if Richmond is saved it will be the wonder of the world, it will be our pride, our joy. I pray fervently for divine help. In God is our trust and I believe we shall yet joyfully praise him. Oh how I love and venerate and trust our wise and heroic Lee.
Sunday, August 7th.
        Willie did not come Thursday, as we hoped, and we were quite anxious but Friday morning early we heard the ambulance coming. I was sleeping up stairs with Miss Kate Stone, and was not yet dressed though I had been up some time. I was soon down stairs, Willie was very weak, and looked badly indeed, he has fallen away so much, his cheeks look hollow and his form very thin. He has not improved very much since he came home, but is as well as one could expect, he was very sick indeed with the bilious fever, has had no fever since he came home. Mrs. Copely and her daughter George spent the day with us Wednesday, as Mrs. Stone and Kate were here we had quite a large party and spent a pleasant day. Mrs. Stone left Thursday
morning for Texas, I suppose Kate will remain with us till next week. We were happily surprised Friday evening by the coming of Mr. Beck and Miss Mary, I was so glad to see them, I hope they will stay some time longer, but am afraid they will not as they are so anxious about home that they cannot go up to Homer to see Mrs. Barr. I do like and admire Miss Mary Beck so much, and am so anxious that she should at least like me; she brought such a welcome present, "Corinne," and "Les oeuvres choisies de Bernardin St. Pierre," containing "Paul et Virginie" just what I was wishing for only two days ago, and I am so glad to have Corinne, which I admire so much. I prize them more too as coming from Miss Mary, though I suppose she only gave them to me from benevolence. Poor little Lory, he has the chills again, had the first Friday, then one yesterday, and today he had a very hard chill and high fever, which has not yet gone off. Eva had a chill day before yesterday and one today, both rather slight. Mr. Gordon was here last night, is undecided about going to Georgia, if he goes it will be about next week. I do so hope he will go, he is so kind about promising to take my letters and find out where Mr. Ridgill is. We had some favourable news about Virginia and Georgia; we have had a battle in Georgia and gained a victory, though by no means a decisive one, but we hope strongly, we have also had some slight successes in Virginia.
Thursday, August 11th.
        It is all so quiet this morning that the bustle and company of the past weeks, especially last night, seems like some gay dream. But I will commence at the first day. Monday Mr. Beck and Miss Mary left, I was so sorry to see
them go and sincerely wished they might have stayed a week longer, but their home is so near the river that in these unquiet times they were anxious to get back.
        Tuesday Miss Mary, Kate and I went into Monroe to spend the day with Mary Stevens, I called on Mrs. Harrison at Dr. Calderwood's, found both her and Miss Maggie at Home and spent a very pleasant hour. We found Mrs. Stevens quite well, for her, and it was late before we left, having obtained a promise from May and Mrs. Copley to come out and spend the night with us and meet Miss Chaffe, a young lady at Dr. Temple's, who came down for some dentistrical work, and who is a friend, and Miss Copley's. Mrs. C. described her to us as a beautiful songstress, and as we had a great desire to hear her sing we determined to have her down with us if she would come.
        When at Miss Calderwood's I borrowed several books from her, one of which "Family pride" she recommended very highly, so as we had nothing better to do we thought it would interest us to read it aloud, accordingly after all our domestic affairs were settled we seated ourselves to our sewing, and I was as usual constituted reader. After we got into the interest of the story, which was not long, we were not willing to stop, and pursued Margaret Desmond's mysterious adventures till dinner and immediately after until time for our afternoon dispersion at nearly five in the afternoon, as may be supposed I was troubled with a slight hoarseness from which I have not yet recovered, my throat feels quite raw this morning, and I have been soothing it with loaf sugar.
        While I was dusting the piano Mary and Mrs. Copley drove up, rested
a few minutes and then went out to Dr. Temple's to call on Miss Chaffe. We were soon dressed and followed them, we found Miss Chaffe in a plain "dumpy" little person with an extremely fair complexion and unfailing smile, she accepted my invitation to tea but was going to spend the night with Mary Stevens, who much to our disappointment was obliged to go home that night, as her Aunt wanted to use the carriage early the next morning, perhaps it was better that she did, for on our return we found Mrs. Templeton and her two daughters here, and we could not possibly have afforded even pallets for so many without putting Willie out of his room, which of course inadmissable. Mrs. Copley told me while she called that she had taken the liberty of inviting for the evening a young gentleman, a friend of hers and a devoted admirer of Miss Chaffe, whom we would know by his uniform of artillery Lieutenant, and by his very small feet, clothed in faded pumps. We laughed very much at her description of the gentleman's last and apparently most striking characteristic. There was quite a circle of us on the piazza when we saw an ambulance driving up, a lady holding the reins, on it's near approach we recognized Lucy Seale, her Mother, and a young gentleman clinging to the back of the vehicle whom they introduced as Capt. Gillespie, and of whom we had frequently heard Kate speak as a cousin of Mrs. Templeton's of by no means a staid disposition or demeanor, as we now experienced. We prevailed on them to descend from their elevation and join our party, and there we sat in formidable array of summer evenings toilets with only three coats interspersed, when the solitary "pair of faded pumps" rode up and manfully facing our bright artillery dismounted, and advanced up the steps, being introduced to us in a body as "Lieut. Coleman ladies," he gladly sank
into the nearest chair and fell into converse with May, his next neighbour; in spite of our large party of ladies and our scarcity of young gentlemen the evening passed quickly and pleasantly, with that freedom which almost invariably attends accidental reunions. Mary Stevens looked so freshly pretty that I felt like kissing her all the evening. We heard the famous voice of good humoured Miss Chaffe, which was very sweet, but I thought tiny and not well managed, but which some of the company applauded to the skies. Miss Mary sang one song, "Juanita," a deep, rich song which suits her powerful voice. I thought it incomparably superior to Miss Chaffe's trills and sinkings, but the rest of the company did not appear to think so, though I remarked the attention the first verse excited and the admiring buzz which filled up the interlude. It was late, about eleven, when Mary and her party left, and Mrs. Templeton sat up for more than an hour afterwards, though I was so tired that my limbs pained and my throat was quite raw and stiff. At last however we retired, and sleep came gratefully as soon as my head touched the pillow.
        This morning after breakfast Mrs. Templeton left, taking Kate with her to pay a visit at her house at Oak Ridge.
        Willie is much improved the last two days, is much stronger, but still looks very badly. Father went to the flouring mill at Downsville this morning to have our little crop of twenty-five bushels of wheat ground, it is only sixteen miles and he will be back tomorrow. We have not yet had any decisive news from Atlanta, but hear some vague rumours about our position there which awaken much anxiety and disquiet in our minds.
Saturday night. Aug. 13th.
        Nothing has happened since I wrote last. Father returned from mill yesterday afternoon, we also finished reading our book, after having read all day my eyes were very tired, and I wanted to walk over to Mrs. Craig's but Mother thought the walk too wet and proposed that I should go down to Mrs. Leighton's. I was just walking up to the gate when Willie saw me, and claimed my promise to take a buggy ride with him, the evening had been so wet I thought he had abandoned the idea. I called at Mrs. Leighton's to return "Des Confidences" and thank her for the pleasure it had given me, chatted rapidly for about five minutes, and left with the great prize of the first volume of Lamartine's "Histoire des Girondins." We had a delightful ride, when we were coming home we had the glorious sunset sky before us, and all around the golden light was reflected by the brilliant green foliage all wet and shining from the recent rain. This evening we have had a fine rain, one of my beloved rainy evenings. We intended to have called on Mrs. Hayward from Homer, who is at Mrs. Temple's, but the rain prevented. I nothing loath sat at my window to watch the rain and read Madame de Sevigné's sprightly letters, but I had not spent more than an hour with this charming french woman when I took out my package of Valeria's precious letters and read them with far tenderer interest, they awoke such affectionate, longing feelings in my heart that I could not refrain from expressing then somewhat, and notwithstanding the uncertainty of Mr. Gordon's crossing the river, I determined to write, and hastily taking out a sheet of paper commenced, night found me still at my delightful and absorbing employment. While we were at supper a mysterious event happened, Rose saw
a man on horseback pass the window, and on going immediately to the front door saw him going down to the other gate, she did not speak and he passed on. We at first thought it might be Uncle Jim going for the cows, as they had not come up as usual, but on Susannah's coming in with the milk soon after, Father sent out to the stables to see if any horses were missing, they were all there; we might have thought Rose mistaken but that we sent up to the gates and found them both open! a very uncourteous visitor whoever he be, I fancy he just came in malice, prepense to leave the gates open and let in the pigs!
        We hear rumours of a raid the Yankees have made into Georgia from Hilton head, but nothing certain.
Monday night. Aug. 15th.
        Willie rode into Trenton this evening in the buggy, is ordered into camp as soon as he is able to go; the ride in tired him very much. I have been anxious for him to quit the quartermaster's service, and now that he is about to leave I find myself full of a kind of upraiding feeling as if it were not kind or sisterly of me to wish him away. I begin to feel all kinds of unnumbered fears for his body and soul, my heart is tonight agitated and troubled, and in addition I feel very nervous and tired. We have had cloudy or rainy weather since Saturday. Mrs. Hayward, Miss Lizzie Tradewell and Sallie Dreux spent the day with us Sunday, I like Miss Lizzie Tradewell more and more as I become acquainted with her. I met her in Homer where she and her Grandmother were very polite and kind to me, they are from Florida, but Miss Tradewell has been to school in Savannah, where she has an Aunt living. There is a little something about her that reminds me of
Valeria, perhaps it is only because Valeria is so constantly in my thoughts, I long for her daily.
        Willie heard today that the Yankees in their raid from Hilton Head had gone as far as Macon and had burned the Oconee railroad bridge, but that they had all been surrounded and captured, probably by our own brave militia. Oh, how it makes my heart throb with proud, thankful joy to think of it. The Oconee bridge was built by Father, it was in a manner the commencement of his railroad career. How anxious we are to hear news of Atlanta, the Yankees on their raid must have passed right by Uncle David's, I wish we could hear from them. The mysterious horseman who passed through our yard the other night was no more romantic personage than a poor half blind soldier who brought a note from Dr. Temple to his wife and probably mistook this for his house, he stayed at Dr. Temple's all night, and went off the next morning to hunt conscripts!
Wednesday, Aug. 17th.
        How lightened my mind feels tonight of the heavy burden which has so long pressed upon. Oh, have I indeed made one stop towards that end which has long been to me the highest. Mr. Lawson, the episcopal minister from Bastrop is coming down to Monroe to preach on Sunday, and tonight I told Mother about how I had long desired to join the Church, she said I might see Mr. Lawson Sunday, unworthy as I am of this high privilege I feel it will give new life to every effort in duty and Oh how inexpressibly it will soothe my weary and often doubtful soul if I am thought fit for this sovereign mercy.
Friday evening. Aug. 19th.
        I have just come in from the room where they are warping our first piece of cloth, it looks so pretty, and I could not help putting my fingers in to the "leese" as they call it, crossed the threads correctly and was full of my triump. Mrs. Lidwell kindly came up to show Alice how to warp, tomorrow they are going to put it into the loom. Mrs. Lidwell says it is very nicely spun, Miss Mary attends to the spinning, has two regular spinners, one, Caroline, does seven cuts very easily; the other, Susannah, has been lazy and only spun five, but yesterday Miss Mary told her she must do six or finish her task after dark, she brought in only five and a half. Miss Mary was faithful to her promise and she brought in the other half cut, in a surprisingly short space of time.
        I received a letter from my dear Aunt Mary yesterday, the first one in a year, though she says she has written many, her letter was affectionate and interesting, and was truly welcome. I do not now feel so utterly cut off from Georgia as before, for this letter came by mail in the short time of one month, she had only received two of my letters, but one was the long one that I wrote first and which described our affairs most fully.
        Miss Mary came at this point in my writing and called me away, to accompany her in a rattling ride home with Mrs. Lidwell, we went in the ambulance and had a delightful ride through the mud; it has been raining almost continually since last Saturday, but now as I raise my eyes I behold with rapture the golden lined clouds in the west which give cheering hope of a fair day tomorrow, while they fill our souls with love and rapture in
the calm evening hour, see how rapidly the bright hues are changing and soon there will be left the deep, peaceful light in the sky through which the stars shine so softly. I am particularly anxious this rainy weather should break now, so that we may go to Church on Sunday. Willie is away today, went down to Millhaven, he is improving very fast. I hope he will be strong before next Thursday, he has set that as the day to leave. While Mother was up the country Eldridge saw a horse at Mrs. Brantley's which he thought resembled Pompey, Willie's lost pony; so Willie sent Antony up there to see, and he returned with an affirmative answer; it appears that one of Mrs. Brantley's sons had traded for it at Shreveport; so Willie, knowing Mrs. Brantley to be a hard woman, has gone to get Mr. McQuiller from he bought Pompey to go up with him as proof; sad to think that this should be thought necessary, but such are these degenerate days when oaths are often lightly taken and still more lightly broken.
        Tuesday morning Mrs. Dortch sent up an invitation for me to come down as she expected Miss Maggie Calderwood and Laura Barnes to come out; I accepted her invitation with pleasure, and spent a very pleasant day, though the rain prevented Miss Maggie and Miss Laura from coming. I think Miss Kane a very pleasant young lady. We have passed many of the hours of this rainy week with great pleasure and profit in reading "The Talisman" aloud, like almost all of Scott's novels it is admirable, the first few chapters rather dragged a little owing, I suppose, to the preoccupation of my mind, but after that we were all intensely interested.
        The air which comes through my window has something of the bracing
coolness of Autumn, I hope the heats of the summer are broken; I look forward to the winter as a time when I shall be able to do much more than I have during this oppressive and languid summer, my fears for its gloominess are less, it seems to me much of the bitterness has gone out of my heart since Wednesday evening, but let me not be too presumptuous, the enemy only waits occasion to tempt me.
        I received a letter from Mrs. Morancy the other evening, she says Mrs. Barr will gladly take Miss Mary and Eva if she can get the room fixed; I hope they will be able to go, it will improve them both. I think in some things Miss Mary depends too much upon, she will when away be obliged to exert her own powers, but how we shall miss them, Willie too away, ours will indeed be a changed family.
Tuesday evening, Aug. 23rd.
        I sit down this evening to chronicle the great event of our year, we have our first piece of cloth in the loom, and while I write I hear Alice weaving. Mrs. Lidwell came over yesterday and put it in but she made a mistake and had to put it in over again today. I congratulate myself that the mysteries of weaving are beginning to be elucidated in my mind. I now understand plain cloth, and really think I could put in a piece myself. Yesterday I "handed up" the thread to Mrs. Lidwell and tired my arm so that it pained me all the evening.
        Willie returned from Mrs. Brantley's Sunday evening, did not get Pompey. Antony made a mistake, the horse was very much like, but (in Willie's opinion at least) not equal to that "Non pareil." Willie's ride
brought back his fever. He did not feel well Sunday evening, and yesterday he had quite a fever, sent for Dr. Whyte, took medicine, and kept his bed this morning, and this afternoon is up and has no fever, I hope it will not come back.
        We went into Monroe Sunday, but how disappointed we were when we found that Mr. Lawson had not come. We heard an earnest and fervent sermon from old Mr. McGuire, and I felt benefited by it, but I was so much disappointed about seeing Mr. Lawson. I have now to put off further the purpose of opening my heart to him on that nearest and highest subject, that which I feel is so imperatively my duty, and which I must perform before I can hope for enduring peace of mind.
        We had the pleasure of welcoming a visit from Dr. McDonough the other evening, his came Saturday soon after dinner, was away yesterday and today, but we expect him back tonight, we are very glad indeed to see him again. The hospital has moved back here again in the same houses it occupied last winter; we are so sorry Dr. McDonough is not with it, but I don't believe he wants to come; Dr. Furness is the chief with Dr. Melton for an assistant, we shall probably have opportunities for perfecting our acquaintance with the former, have not seen him yet. Mr. Gordon is here this evening, will remain all night, I suppose, I am very much afraid he will not go to Georgia. Oh, if he only would, how rejoiced I would be!
        We had a lame soldier here Sunday and yesterday. Father was at the quartermaster's office in Trenton the other day and found him there trying to get transportation. Father brought him out this far, and this morning
he left on one of the hospital wagons, he lives about twenty miles from Homer, is named "Peace," has been in the army three years, wounded twice, the last time was at Chicka mauga, where he was shot in the ankle, and now he has to walk on crutches, he appears to be a very good, honest young man; has not heard from his family since Vicksburg fell, and says he supposes his Mother and Father think he is dead. What a glad surprise his return will be.
        The weather is delightful now, we appreciate it so much after the rain, my geranium is growing so beautifully and the heliotropes are luxuriant, the little garden looks so beautiful in the morning when the heavy dew actually drips from the plants.