July 7th / 1861--Sunday--
        I have not written in here in so long a time because I have been hardly able to perform the manifold duties that have fallen upon lately, and of course would not have felt justified in taking any time for writing. Since Wednesday I have had a very bad cold, for two days it seemed almost impossible for me to sit up, indeed I did lie down all Thursday evening; yesterday and today I have felt much better.
        Poor Miss Mary is in bed yet, Saturday was the first day she has missed her regular chill and fever, she is very weak and has grown very thin indeed, she is much more nervous than we expected from her and is easily disturbed by noise, though poor girl she cannot have much quiet, we are so situated that it is almost if not quite impossible to get a moments perfect quiet during the entire day.
        Our little baby is very sick, he has had a had cold all the week, and was threatened with the croup all Friday night, Saturday and last night, today he is scarcely any better, he is very weak. Georgie also has been suffering from a bad cold, this week, he is much better now.
        Mother has been sitting up since Wednesday, but has not been out of her room until yesterday, she is now very well again.
        Father left us for New Orleans Monday evening and returned last night, he is looking very well again. Father received a letter from Mr. John Green while away, he writes that his company is encamped near Richmond to drill, they have not, as they hoped, been called into immediate service, but are being well prepared to fight when they do engage; Mr. J. Green says nothing about his own situation or feeling, but
I presume that of course he is contented.
        The fourth of July passed very quietly here, my mind was so much occuppied by other things that I had almost forgotten the day. There was a picnic some four or five miles from here; I see by the papers that the day was kept with the proper decorum; stores and offices were closed, and closed and the appropriate salutes fired, but there were no noisy demonstrations. I think that the day should have been observed with unusual strictness, but it is but natural and right that the feeling should have been more of sober thankfulness and religious prayer than of noisy joy.
        We have had a nice rain this evening, it is very refreshing for the day has been very warm, Aunt Jane spent the day with us Friday she was looking very well, and was very pleasant.
        There has been a comet visible for some nights past, I went out to see it Friday night, it was very beautiful, but its brightness was beginning to wane. I was sorry that I had not been well enough to have seen it at first.
        The rain has cleared away, and the son is hastening to a clear setting, this is the most delightful part of our Sabbath, it is a time when our thoughts are insensibly drawn away from Earth and when, looking at the declining sun

                            We can almost think we see
                            Through golden vistas into Heaven.
        How delightful a quiet Sabbath evening, in its stillness arise thoughts that strengthen us to bear our daily burden through the busy week, until the blessed season comes again.
        But if the day has not been consecrated to God the calmness of the evening only affords a silent time when accusing actions can rise up
against us, and be heard; well for us if we heed the warning of conscience now.
        I realize lately how near death always is, he can enter every where; no precaution is able to bar him out. Why not then look death steadily in the face; why not accustom ourselves to the contemplation of the grave, as something which we must encounter and which we cannot destroy by looking away from it. Why not live in the constant rememberance that this is only a preparation and that our true life lies beyond; then should we be ready for death, and never need hush the whisper in soul that tells us the unwelcome truth, death is ever able to intrude.
Tuesday, July 9th--
        John is very much better, he commenced to improve late Sunday evening, and has been quite bright since, but is still pale and rather fretful. Mother thinks it is the cutting of his jaw teeth.
        Miss Mary had another chill this morning, she seemed very much better yesterday afternoon and sat up some time, but this chill has prostrated her completely, she is very low spirited too.
        My cold is nearly well, I feel better today than I have for a week. I took salts yesterday and it completely freed me from the headache from which I have been suffering the past week. I have been taking some horseback rides lately, yesterday morning I rode out with Father, and this morning I went down to the mill with him, we left quite early, but Father had a mule which he wished to shoe, and this, with some other duties detained him so long that we did not get back home until eleven o'clock; we had a delightful ride for though the sun was shining very warm, we came by a bridle path through the woods and did not feel the
heat at all.
        Mrs. Nobles, one of our neighbors, called to see Mother this morning, she gave us a paper from the militart sewing society in Monroe, authorizing the ladies out here to form a branch society, Mother and I both signed our names, the ladies are to meet Thursday and elect officers for the society.
        Dr. Young's oldest son, Adam, has returned from school for vacation, I have not seen him yet, he is younger than Carrie.
Sunday, July 14th--
        I have been so much occuppied by social duties since Tuesday that I have not had time to write, Wednesday I rode down to the mill with Willie in the morning, and in the evning I went over to Dr. Young's to call on Miss Marshall of Vicksburg, a young lady who is visiting Carrie. Thursday was the day appointed for the meeting of our society. I of course went, Mother was not able to leave Miss Mary; we had a very pleasant meeting, about twelve or thirteen ladies were present, and we had nineteen names on our list.
        The officers elected were, Mrs. Robles, president, Miss Josephine Friend, vice president, Miss Bry, treasurer, and Miss Sarah Wadley, secretary. The next meeting is a week from next Thursday.
        Thursday afternoon I went down to see Mrs. Adams and intended to go to Major Bry's but found his daughter at Mr. Adams, and consequently spent the evening there. Friday morning rode down to the camps with Willie, and paid a visit to Mrs. Hodge Adams; in the afternoon went down to see the Misses Bry, spent a very pleasant hour in the society of the family. Saturday morning the quarterly meeting at the Methodist Church commenced, I went to Church, and heard a sermon, which, though neither elegant nor very tasteful, did me good by giving new impetus
to my endeavours to attain goodness.
        After service the presiding elder made a few remarks about our sewing society for the soldiers and invited all the ladies to join it. Dr. Young, who was present, proposed that the gentlemen should all retire and leave the ladies unembarressed and said that the secretary, Miss Sarah Wadley who was present, might then take the names; accordingly the gentleman retired, a pencil and paper was obtained and I received eighteen names, some married ladies, some unmarried, two of the ladies paid me their admission fee (one dollar each) which I sent down to the treasurer this morning; my position would probably have been very embarrassing had I not been slightly acquainted with a number of the ladies.
        This morning I went to Church again, Miss Marshall went with me, and I found her very agreeable, she has been very well educated and has mixed with good society for two or three years. The Church was very full today, quite a number of people were obliged to remain outside for want of room in the Church. The text was from Romans, upon Christian duty, the minister was very well at home upon this subject, and preached a very good sensible sermon, it was rather long, and many persons complained of fatigue but I was not much tired.
        The Communion was administered to the white members and then to the negroes; I thought the Communion of the negroes was very affecting, more so than that of the whites; slaves seem so much more dependent, their position in society makes their deportment so much more humble, that it is peculiarly interesting to see them receive the spiritual body and blood of Christ.
        Altogether, service was to me quite impressive, the surroundings
were so novel, a country Church built of hewn logs, blackened but not decayed by years; a roof which high and pointed as it was served for a dome, in the top of which spiders had woven their webs, and dirt daubers built their nests unmolested by the occassional congregation; windows without glass but having rude shutters instead; hard wooden benches and a high square pulpit of plain boards without ornament of any kind was the Church which crowned the summit of a low hill, with the forest growth untouched by the axe of the settler, from the windows we looked out upon a thick wall of green of countless beautiful shades and fluttered by cool south breezes; turning our eyes inward they were almost pained by the light colors of dresses mantles and bonnets, pure white, bright pink and green, blue and yellow, quiet brown and somber black, from the young lady dressed in neat, fashionable summer toilet to the poor girl in her flowered caliko and green sun bonnet, all the grades from a dowdy to the neat old country woman or her quiet daughter; and over this heterogenous congregation presided the minister, the circuit rider, a tall sinewy man, with black hair and iron grey beard who expounded the scriptures without the ornament of graceful attitudes or fluent speech, but with energy and sincere plainness, frequently wanting for a word but often propounded a startling question with perfect simplicity and clearness. I have not been to Church before in nearly six months, and though it was differrent, from what I have been accustomed to, still I enjoyed it very much more than I expected.
        Willie has joined a company in Trenton, he drilled for the first time yesterday. It is a home guard and will only leave in case of a call for more troops. Willie went to Church with us this morning.
 Miss Mary is very much better, she has not had chill since Tuesday she rode out Friday for the first time.
        Mother and I went to Mrs. Wilson's yesterday afternoon, found her very pleasant.
Wednesday, July 17th--
        Father went to Vicksburg Monday, and we expect him back tonight. Every thing has gone along very quietly this week. Mother and I went up to see Mrs. Williams yesterday afternoon, she is one of our near neighbors, and is a very pleasant, elderly lady, I became acquainted with her at the meeting of our society.
        I have taken my morning ride as usual, every day, this morning Willie and I went along a delightful road through the woods, it was in some places a rough bridle path and the leaves often formed a green canopy over our heads. The beautiful Beech tree grew abundantly in the low lands, and on the hills oaks and hickorys threw their wide branches across the pathway, all of them surmounted by the noble pine, now lovely in its bright green summer attire; I enjoy a ride through the woods so much.
        There is to be a concert and supper in Monroe tonight, for the benefit of the Ladies Volunteer Aid society. I have been pressed to go by all my acquaintances around here, and Aunt Jane invited me to spend the night of the concert with her, but I thought it would be better for me not to go, I have no appropriate dress to wear. Father could not be at home to go with me and though I should no doubt have enjoyed after getting there, yet I felt no very great desire to go; Carrie Young is one of the performers, they expect to have very fine music.
        Today has been quite warm, we have been expecting rain all day but I do not think it will come, we are needing rain very much now, but I
should prefer, on account of the concert, that it would come tomorrow instead of today.
July 22nd/ 61--
        We have had a delightful rainy day, we were needing rain and now it has been granted and in just the right quantity and manner, this morning it showered a little and remained cloudy with a very few short intervals of sunshine until noon, when a pouring rain commenced and continued for an hour. It has been cloudy ever since, and this rain with the moist atmosphere will revive the verdant green all around, I hope it has been general.
        Yesterday I attended Sunday School at Church, a bible class has just been formed and I was happy to have the opportunity of joining one, we have not many members yet, but will probably have more in time.
        Father returned Wednesday night as we expected, he left for Vicksburg again this evening. Mother and Miss Mary went to Monroe Friday, they spent the day with Aunt Jane at Dr. Roane's found Aunt Jane very well.
        Our troops have achieved a great victory under Beauregard, the number engaged on either side is not known, the enemy attempting to advance were met at Bulls run near Manassas and a severe battle of an hour ensued, our troops gained a complete victory and the enemy retreated in confusion after a great loss; it is said that we lost very few.
        Beauregard had a narrow escape, the Federalists having probably ascertained his whereabouts fired into the kitchen where he sat at dinner but he was unhurt. Strikingly illustrative of their disregard of the humanity, so to speak, of civilized warfare, is the fact that they fired into the hospital over which the yellow flag was flying.
        It is said that ten thousand Federalists were repulsed by seven
thousand Confederates under General Bonham and with great slaughter.
        God seems to aid us, he has thus far given us the victory.
        How little can we forsee through the clouds of sorrow the loving hand which afflicts us in mercy and which will lead us safely to the serene light of lasting peace. A year ago yesterday my beloved Aunt breathed her last, closed her eyes on the sorrows of Earth and I trust passed into happiness. Oh how much better thus, had she continued in life untill now how could she have borne the sight of war, how could we have borne to see her surrounded by sorrows her very husband leading his children in the paths of fanaticism and Treason soon alas to lead to anarchy or tyranny, to have known that she and her brother were divided by impassible barriers, this would have killed her, better is it that she departed while all was outwardly peaceful, when she might gather an undivided family around her and bid them goodbye in peace; were she living now, she would be to us worse than dead. I have come to look upon her loss with resignation I hope to join her in the mansions of the blessed where there shall be no more dissension or sorrow, but the great king shall reign in divine peace.
Sunday, July 28th/ 61.--
        I have today to record a most splendid and complete victory achieved by the southern army, we first received the news on Tuesday but fearing lest it might not be authentic I waited till today to write about it. We have now received full details. The battle was fought last Sunday, commenced early in the morning and continued till after the darkness came on, the number of troops on the United States side is said to be somewhere near 60,000 we had not more than 35,000, the battle was hard fought, at one time our position was critical but a reinforcement came up and decided the day, the enemy fled precipitately leaving their wounded
and all their baggage and provisions. Beauregard and Johnston commanded but Davis arrived at the scene of battle at noon, both Beauregard and Johnston displayed great personal bravery, the loss of the enemy in killed, wounded and prisoners amounts to from ten to fifteen thousand, we lost about five hundred killed and one thousand wounded, no prisoners. Our troops captured sixty one pieces of cannon besides a great quantity of arms and ammunition, immense quantities of baggage and provisions.
        It in said that General Scott was near the field of battle in his carriage when they retreated he also left his carriage and escaped in one direction while the vehicle drove off in another. The soldiers of our army captured the carriage which contained his sword and epalelettes, a greater stigma (if it were possible) now attaches itself to his name.
        The accounts given of the Federal army are most disgraceful, it is said that among other things captured were a number of bills of fare, for most elaborate dinners to be given by McDowell on his march to Richmond.
        Col. Francis Bartow of Georgia was killed, while heading a gallant charge of his regiment, he was a brave man and a competent officer, Father was well acquainted with him. The hand of providence is clearly seen in this victory, God fought on our side and nerved the hearts and hands of our soldiers else we had not been victorious, we are thankful for his goodness unto us.
        Miss Mary, Eva, and I went to Sunday School this morning, we also had a meeting for the purpose of testifying our thanks to God for this great victory. Dr. Young preached, this was in accordance with a resolution of the Confederate congress recommending the people to observe this
as a day of thanksgiving all joined in praising the merciful providence of our God.
        President Davis' message is all that we could have hoped from our hero statesman. Wise, moderate, and just in council, cool, brave and gallant in battle; firm, energetic and instant in the performance of his executive duties, truly we have in him a second Washington, there is in his message nothing rabid or undignified, his declarations are decided and explicit, but mild almost to gentleness; yet in the same paper which contains his message, we read of him on the battle field charging at the head of his troops and mingling personally in the affray.
        We had our second meeting last Thursday, but little was done, we have not received letters from the volunteers and do not know what they want, shall probably have some sewing soon.
        Willie has the chills and fever, he was taken Thursday, Mother has given him medicine and thinks she has broken the chills.
        Father went to Vicksburg Monday, Miss Mary and Aunt Jane went in Wednesday, Miss Mary went to have her tooth attended to, she expected to have returned the same night but was obliged to remain until Thursday when she and Father both returned.
        Mr. Robt. Green and his company leave for Virginia the last of next week, he said that he would be sure to come out and see us before leaving.
        The first two or three days of this week were very cool but yesterday and today have been very warm.
Monday, July 29th/ 1861--
        Today an accident happened which renders this day one of the memorable days of our quiet life. Mother and I were sitting here very quietly talking to Carrie Young who was over here, when Emmeline said, "Miss
Sarah, a gentleman is coming". I immediately went to the door and to my great surprise saw a gentlemen in uniform, at first glance I thought it was Horace Holton but I soon saw that I was mistaken and that it was a perfect stranger, he came up and said that he would be much obliged if Mother would have his horse taken out of the buggy and a saddle put on him, as he was on special business for the Confederate Army and his horse would not drive. While Uncle Jim was putting up the buggy, the soldier sat down and explained himself to us; his name he said was Lieutenant Hervey of President Davis' staff, he had been traveling night and day on business to some companies at Shreveport, he would have gone through on the stage last night, but he had Confederate bonds to pay his passage with, and the stage proprietors refused to take him unless he paid seventeen dollars in cash, he then showed them his credentials and a paper from President Davis respectfully requesting all heads of railroads and other public conveyances to allow Lieutenant Hervey to pass and take his acknowledgement as a voucher for the payment of the Confederate states, but not withstanding this, they still refused to allow him to go, he then, thinking that he could do no more, obtained a horse and buggy and started on his way this morning, not however until he had written to the authorities giving an account of his treatment.
        We were perfectly astonished at this behaviour from the stage proprietors. I had not thought that there was any man in our midst who would not have speeded any of our soldiers on their way, especially an officer of the staff and on particular business.
        The young man lived in Jefferson, Texas and went to the war as Lieutenant in the Orleans Cadets, he was first ordered to Pensacola but afterwards removed to Virginia, he was in the skirmish in which Col.
Charles Dreux was killed, he himself narrowly escaped; (being wounded in the shoulder) he was promoted twice until he reached the rank of Lieutenant in the staff. He was originally from Columbus, Georgia, his Father was Col. Hervey who was killed in the Mexican war. This young man is an only child and his Mother a widow, had it not been for the outrageous conduct of those stage proprietors he might have spent a few hours at home. He has been absent six months and has not heard from his Mother. He says that the Independent Blues, the company of which Horace is saargent, is at Yorktown. The Ouachita Blues are encamped near Richmond.
        He left Richmond the day before the battle, but received a dispatch from a member of the Cabinet saying that the sword and epaulettes of Scott, also his carriage and horses had arrived in Richmond, and that the award was the same one presented to Scott by the ladies of Virginia! What must be his feeling, a traitor to his country, a fugitive, flying in a most disgraceful retreat, hated and in disgrace both North and South! We lent Lieutenant Hervey a saddle, bridle, and pair of saddle bags, and bade him a most fervent "God speed".
        Willie is much better today but is very weak, he looks badly. I would have thought a few days sickness could make so great a change.
        Father and I rode down to the mill this morning, Father took John in his arms and carried him along, he was delighted with his ride for the first mile and then he went to sleep.
        We called by Mrs. Hodge Adams', they leave for Texas tomorrow morning. Mrs. Adams is delighted to get away, she dislikes this country greatly but thinks Texas perfectly delightful.
        Father went to Monroe after we returned, he was not here to see Lieutenant Hervey, I know he will be angry when he hears of the conduct
of those stage people.
        Today is quite warm. Carrie Young spent two or three hours with us this morning, for the first time since she came home, hitherto she has only remained a few minutes, she has not been to see me before in three or four weeks. Mrs. Young has been sick, she was over here Saturday.
Wednesday, July 31st/ 61--
        My last entry was filled with the description of Lieutenant Hervey and his mission, it is but fair that I should record Father's reception of our story, he merely laughed, surprised at this, we somewhat warmly asked what excited his mirth, he said he was laughing at our officer, on questioning him further we found out that he had met Lieutenant Hervey on the road, and he thought from his appearance that Davis would hardly have sent him on very particular business. Dr. Young says that the papers he offered to the stage proprietors were not Confederate bonds, but were spurious, the Dr. also says that this same man was at Bastrop last week, he was also at the concert in Monroe, his story and his actions do not tally at all, Dr. Young says he is sure that he is an imposter, Father is not so sure that he is altogether an imposter but is fully convinced that his rank and mission are not as important as he represented them.
        After leaving here Lieutenant Hervey went over to Dr. Young's and borrowed a horse from Mrs. Young after excited the sympathies of Mrs. Y. and Mrs. Sthresthly he went on to a house about twelve miles from here and told the same exciting story, he took the stage there, and the gentleman of the house sent back Dr. Young's horse and our saddle and bridle. We have
over to Dr. Young's this evening, Mrs. Sthresthly looks very badly, she no doubt suffers great anxiety of mind. Mrs. Young looks better, Carrie was at Monroe, she went Tuesday.
        We met a preacher, a Mr. Armstrong of the methodist denomination. Father sent for us about dusk to come home to see Mrs. Williams who had called in our absence.