Feb. 2nd. 1864. Tuesday.
        This is such a beautiful day, "so cool, so clear, so bright," after we had finished school this morning I had an hour or more before, for as Miss Mary went to the dentist we finished the studies quite soon, and I spent the time out in the garden where Father is pruning the fruit trees
and Uncle Jim is planting seed. It made me feel so happy to be out in the clear warm sunshine, with the deep blue sky above and the wind sighing so sweetly through the pines whence it came with fresh, warm breath to my cheek, everything looks so happy and lovely; the children behaved well in school too, all three of them had perfect lessons and I was very much pleased with Eva for overcoming a lesson in intellectual arithmetic, a study very difficult and very distasteful to her, this evening too I am having a very pleasant reading time, have spent an hour or two with Humbolt and am going now to enjoy Lamartine, it is the first afternoon I have devoted to reading for some time. Yesterday evening I spent in having Annie put up a little fence around our "bower" in the wood and in planting some violets and periwinkle there. I was very much tired by it, I take so little exercise that I cannot endure much. Dr. McDonough came over in the evening. I traced out some of my old friends, the winter constellations, last night, I think I never saw the stars more beautifully bright. Willie left for his duties at Millhaven Monday, we shall not see him again I suppose until Saturday. Drs. McDonough and Furness dined here Sunday and spent nearly all the afternoon. I think I should like Dr. Furness very well, he appeared quite pleasant and sensible. Dr. McDonough has grown to be one of my favorites, there seem to be such much undercurrent in him. The other night after we had sung "Annie Laurie" he got to speaking about the song and incidents connected with it. Miss Mary and he and I were sitting rather apart and as he always speaks in a very low voice the conversation of the others flowed by us; he told us a story of a young man who had loved and lost a beautiful young girl and was left by his misfortune
in a state of deep dejection. One night his friends persuaded him to a party where he was treated with the utmost respect and every effort made to draw him from his deep dejection, as he was a fine musician he was led to the piano and the most respectful silence prevailed while he sadly struck a few chords and then wandered in a beautiful symphony, at length he commenced to sing "Annie Laurie" with unexampled pathos and sweetness, when he breathed the concluding words "for bonnie Annie Laurie I'd lay me down and die" his voice died away but he remained at the piano, his friends waited in silence for some time thinking that he was indulging in one of his frequent reveries on his lost love, but seeing that he moved not, they approached to arouse him, but he was dead. It is a beautiful story of tender love and affected me very much. Dr. McDonough's words faltered more and more towards the end and I saw his soft dark eyes were full of tears; they say he was engaged to a young lady, but just as they were about to be married she was drowned accidentally. If this be so, how beautiful in him to remain constant to that one lost love so many years; for he is now quite grey headed.
Monday, Feb. 8th. 1864.
        Willie left us again this morning. We had a very pleasant morning in school, the children all did very well, Loring was a little provoked about his spelling but soon overcame it. It has been a long time since he has been in one of his violent passions with me. Dr. McDonough and Dr. Furness came over yesterday after supper. Only stayed a short time. Dr. Furness twisted and turned about as if he were very uncomfortable, and I could scarcely keep my eyes open I was so sleepy, and Dr. McDonough had not much to say, so the evening was not very pleasant. There was a very sick man over at the Hospital so they could not stay long, Mr. Haddicks said they expected him to die today, poor fellow! how I pity them, it must be so hard to die in a hospital. I must stop writing from necessity, my ink is all used up, it is some Dr. McD. gave me, and I have no more fit to use. I am ashamed to ask for any more, though the Dr. is so kind he would not hesitate to give it to me.
Wednesday, Feb. 10th.
        The other evening after I finished writing, I walked out in the hall and saw the children all in the grove, playing so merrily that I went out to join them, we played "puss in the corner" until we were tired and then as we were dancing around singing "Sweet beans and barley grows" Miss May saw a buggy coming out, and telling the rest of us we all stopped to wonder who it could be, it was Mr. Gordon, come to see about his teams crossing the river, the teams camped here that night and Mr. Gordon left with them the next morning.
Yesterday afternoon we went to the funeral of Mr. Moore, Mrs. Lidwell's brother, who died Monday evening. The funeral was very small, there were but three or four besides the mourners; Miss Mary and I did not go to the house as we had no conveyance (our buggy and ambulance were used by the family) but we walked to the grave which is only about a mile and a half from here. George and Loring went with us, we arrived about two hours before the funeral procession came and the time of quiet waiting prepared me to feel the sadness of the scene, the burying ground has no enclosure of any sort around it, there are a few graves, each surround either by a neat paling, a rude rail fence or a little sort of roof built over it, the dead leaves lie thickly over the ground, over head the pines sigh a low requiem which alone breaks the stillness and takes away from the desolation of this rude and lonely spot, in sight is the rude Church blackened by time and now all fallen into ruin. I was deeply touched by the sight of some sweet violets blooming on a mosey grave. Poor Miss Anna Moore, the tears came in spite of my efforts to restrain them when I saw her silent weeping and thought how desolate, how lonely she was in seeing the last remains of her Father lowered into the grave.
        Today is Ash Wednesday, we had school this morning, but I took no dinner and spent several hours this afternoon alone with my bible and my thoughts, thoughts sad enough when I reflect on my many, many faults, on the times when I swerve from my right path. I had no ink when I wrote before, this is little better than none. I mixed the dregs of my inkstand with some watery stuff I had and used before I got the other, it is too dark to see any longer, must put up my book.
Thursday, Feb. 11th.
        We have spent such a pleasant day, Dr. McDonough has been with us from soon after breakfast until a few minutes ago, and he and Miss Mary have been singing ad practising a great deal of the time. Last night he and Dr. Furness spent the evening with us, and Dr. D. appointed this morning as a practising time, so we expected him and did not go into school, he came accompanied by Mr. Kimball, a great surprise to me. I had never met him but twice before, and then only by accident, he only stayed about fifteen minutes, said he wanted to get to Vienna tonight, he brought me a message from, as he said, an old friend of mine, Miss Sallie Brantley, it was that she sent her best love and an urgent invitation to come and see her; I feel quite acquainted with Miss Sallie Brantley though I have never seen her I have heard her spoken of so often.
        Mr. Henry Reynolds (brother of Loring's god father) and Capt. Thomas also called but did not come in. Mr. Reynolds called to know if I had heard recently from his sister, Mrs. Veader, gave me two letters he had just received from her. I was glad to hear from her and to know that she is well. Mr. Reynolds said that if I would direct letters to Savannah, via Shreveport, putting five ten cent stamps on it, it would probably go safely by mail. I am so glad to find any way to send a letter.
        This is the last page of my journal book, a book which has been with me and been my faithful confidant in so many scenes and in so many different moods, I don't know what I should do without my journal, it is such a relief to me to write here; and this book will always be of peculiar interest to me as the one which holds the record of our eventful, of our
important journey. I shall always like to be able to recall it in all the particularities which I have written down here, and which I might gradually forget without this record.


Oakland, Tuesday, Feb. 16th. 1864.
        Willie came home Friday night quite unexpectedly, he was in Monroe hauling corn across the river, went away early the next morning. Mother spent Friday with Mrs. Seale, brought as some Magnolia seed, I have not planted them yet. Saturday morning I set our plants, or rather the roots, out on the shelves, I don't know whether they will revive; my geranium is dead. I was going to set it in the garden, but on taking it up found the roots quite rotten. I was not very well Saturday, and this discovery of my poor dead flower was too much for me, it made me so sad, it seemed to me to foretell evil to my friend from whom it took it's sweet name. I suffer much from debility and low spirits the last few week, sometime I am so overpowered by melancholy and find myself in such fits of abstraction that I fear I am losing my mind. I must struggle more against it, sometimes my body feels so weary and weak and my mind and heart so sad that I can scarcely sit up, and feel cross and pettish whenever I am spoken to; I think it comes from the state of my health, it is exercise I need, and I am determined not to neglect this duty any longer as I have done.
        Saturday evening Mr. Baxter came, he is an old gentleman from Georgia, not personally known to Father though they are mutually acquainted by reputation, and have corresponded; he and his wife stayed all night here a year ago, while Father was in Virginia, and he stopped the other evening to know if we had heard from him, but finding Father at home and it being late Saturday evening, he accepted Father's invitation to remain with us
till Monday. Dr. McDonough cam over Saturday night, stayed quite late, as he thought it would be the last evening he could hear Miss Mary sing. Willie was home Saturday evening again so that we had quite a company; Mr. Baxter told us all some more bad news about the lawlessness and the scarcity of provisions in Texas, and he and Father agreed in thinking Georgia the best place for these times or, as father emphatically said once before, "the best place in peace or war." Mr. B. came down here to invest some money in lands on the Ouachita river, he did not do so on examination and inquiry in Monroe, so he told Mother as he passed back to Texas this morning.
        Sunday morning I was so ill and weak I was obliged to lie down for an hour or two after breakfast, was much benefitted by my rest and well enough to eat heartily of roast duck at dinner, when Dr. McDonough joined us, he returned to the hospital in the afternoon but rejoined us after tea, to tell us goodbye, but while here he received letters from Dr. Furness (who is on a visit to Mt. Lebanon) telling him that Dr. F. had obtained leave for him to remain here until he came back, probably about Thursday. I found myself scarcely able to sit up in the evening, and though the company was very pleasant I rejoiced when we came to our room. Monday Mother was confined to her bed with a bad headache resulting from cold, this prevented our having school. We were quite lonesome with Mother sick and Father and Willie away. Father went to Millhaven Monday morning, is not coming back till tomorrow. After dinner Dr. McDonough came over, gave me some ideas on drawing and colouring and made me desire to learn to draw more earnestly than ever. Miss Mary and he practised an hour or two, commenced to learn
the beautiful song, "Sleeping I dream love," it is such a favourite of mine. The doctor stayed till after supper, we appointed Wednesday evening for a horseback ride, the last one I shall take in a long time for I am going to send Mollie down to Millhaven to pasture on the cane Thursday, she is getting quite poor. I spent some time yesterday copying an air which Dr. McD. improvised an the piano, and to which he has written some words. I like the air quite well, find it difficult to copy from his playing it, he does not know the notes of music and cannot write it himself. I have not seen the words yet, he promised to bring them over this evening, it is a hymn for peace, he says. The wind blows quite cool today though the sun is shining brightly, we had a hard rain Sunday night, the days have been warm and springlike for a week or two past, but vegetation has scarcely begun to develop itself, the oaks and other forest tress show no buds as yet, I suppose this is owing to the frosty nights. I have a beautiful pink hyacinth in bloom today, it seems to me I never saw such a beautiful shade of pink, the violets we blooming again, I gather a vase full every morning. Mother's peas are coming up and so are some few other vegetables, but the work in the garden progresses slowly, there is so much to do; the garden has never been laid out at all until this year.
        I can write no longer now, am going this evening to see Miss Anna Moore.
Thursday, Feb. 18th.
        Oh it is so cold, I have just returned from a walk in the garden with Father and though I was well wrapped up I was painfully cold when I came,
the thermometer stands at 34° in a sheltered place, this four deg. higher than it was this morning, however, so we may hope that it will be pleasant again by tomorrow night, this cold will put vegetation back again. I do not think the fruit trees are sufficiently far advanced for the fruit to be injured, I am sure ours are not.
        Tuesday evening on my return from Mrs. Lidwell's I found Mrs. Bondurant and Mrs. Marble here, before they left a negro boy came up to know if two ladies could stay all night, after some little demurring Mother consented to take them, they were Mrs. Moore and her daughter Miss Nichols, refugees form Tensas parish. Mrs. Bondurant was slightly acquainted with them and they had a great deal to tell and to hear; we found that we had stopped in front of their house about five minutes one day while we were travelling and this circumstance, slight as it was, made us feel less like strangers; they had a dreadful time coming through the swamp, broke down once, five or six miles from any house, and had to ride that distance on mules with only a shawl for a saddle; they were quite pleasant. Miss Lucy Nichols was very young and very small and very affected, appeared like a spoiled only daughter among three older brothers, but very good humoured and lively. The next morning Mrs. Moore charged me repeatedly to make Willie get acquainted with her sons, "one a Lieutenant in the Tensas cavalry, and one in the commissary department," and her last words were to Willie, repeating the same charge; her Lieut. and her commissary are equally indifferent to me.
        After Mrs. Moore left Mother started for Monroe to meet Father, she took Georgie with her. We had all assembled in the parlour for school,
finding Rose had neglected to make a fire in the schoolroom, and Willie was putting on his over socks and comforter by the fire, when Dr. McDonough knocked; he spent the day with us, which passed quickly and pleasantly in playing and singing and trying songs, among which last was his hymn, he brought the words over and Miss Mary learned the air quite correctly. We gave the Doctor some boiled shoulder and cornbread and cow peas for dinner with some fried eggs for an entree, it was all we had and he seemed quite content. The evening was so chill and cloudy that we could not ride. Dr. Rolls sent for Dr. McD. in the afternoon near dark. It was late when Father and Mother and little Georgie came home, they were very cold. Doctor McDonough spent the evening. This morning we had school again, all my scholars behaved well, and consequently I feel quite bright tonight. I had a good time for reading this evening, have been interrupted for several days.
Saturday night, Feb. 20th.
        Have just returned from a ride with the Dr., he came over this morning to ask if I could go this evening. I had just sent Mollie away this morning and thought I could not go, but the Dr. proposed my riding on Dr. Rolls pony and as I wished very much to ride, I consented to what I have never done but once before, ride a strange horse, the pony was rather rough, but I enjoyed my ride very much indeed, the weather moderated a good deal last night and it was a delightful evening, bright sunlight with a pleasant fresh west wind. We rode some distance, principally through my favourite wood paths, I feel a little fatigued and somewhat stiff, it is so long since I
rode any. On my return I found Mrs. Bondurant here, she only stayed a few minutes after I came. The Doctor did not come in, is coming over after tea. Father is looking very badly now, is not sick, but overcome with a dreadful debility, I have so recently passed through it myself that I can fool with his perfectly, he is very much troubled in mind about what is to become of us, thinks a little of sending us all to Kentucky so that the children can go to school. I hope earnestly that he may not decide to do it, to me the very idea in insupportable, I think it would be better for the children to go on even as they are now rather than for us to be thus separated from him and Willie. Willie was at home last night, left this morning, we shall not see him for two weeks or more again, he is gone up to bayou Bartholomew an a keel boat to bring down some corn, most of the soldiers from here have gone down to Columbia now to protect the negroes who are working on fortifications there now, there is some rumour that headquarters will be moved there, then we should see but little of Willie.
Tuesday, Feb. 22. 1864.
        The birthday of Washington, an anniversary sacred to the memory of freedom. Alas, how is it now polluted, this is the day appointed by the infamous Banks for his election for Governor and other State officers of Louisiana, a mere farce; the flimsiness of the pretence must be apparent to every mind, for the legislative assembly is to have full power, except where its decrees conflict the will of Lincoln, made known as he shall see fit by proclamations from time to time. Oh that we could free ourselves from this bondage, from this disgraceful, this heavy yoke, when will the
time come when we shall be rid of this impudent invader, if I were only sure of our final victory it would not be so hard, yet resignation is our duty, however great the trial.
        We children are quite alone today, Father and Mother have gone to Monroe. Dr. McDonough left Monday morning, we miss him so much, he was here so constantly before he left, spent the day and evening with us Sunday, we parted with sincere regret on both sides. Mr. Peterson came out yesterday, took dinner with us, brought "Life on the Ocean wave," which he had copied for Miss Mary, he copies so nicely; spoke of his baby, says he thinks it is the greatest treasure in the world.
        The weather in fine and warm again, I hope we shall have no more cold. Mother, Miss May and I went to Mrs. Craig's yesterday evening, something was said about our school, when Mrs. Craig asked me if I did not want another scholar, she was in jest, but told her in earnest that if she would send Margaret I would do my best for her, she is just Miss May's age, and a nice, sensible girl, I like her very much, she is so plain and industrious and intelligent too.
Friday, Feb. 26th. 1864.
        We had quite an excitement here yesterday evening, I was sitting reading when I heard a terrible scream from Georgie. Mother and I were both frightened and started up, I ran with several of the servants to the place from whence the screams came and found George up in the other grove with Mr. Heddicks and Loring, they had erected a machine called a flying horse, consisting of a pole supported on a stake by a pin which allowed it
to revolve freely, some boards were nailed on the ends of the pole, and on these two persons were to sit, one on each end, while another pushed it around. George and Lory had gotten on these seats but the pole, being made of pine, broke and poor Georgie fell, the pole came down on his ancle and sprained it badly, he was very much frightened as well as hurt. We brought him up to the house, bathed his foot in cold water and afterwards, finding it much swollen, rubbed it with some hot liniment, it does not pain him now but he cannot walk on it.
        The fine weather still continues, I have been eager to get out in the garden all day but have not been at liberty until now. Have felt quite "lazy" all day and very dreamy, had a very vivid dream this morning just before rising of my dear friend Valeria, and have been thinking of her all day, it seems to me I can see her before me, and very often in spite of my sober reason when I lift up my eyes I expect to see her beloved form, this morning when I was thinking of her it seemed to me a long, narrow vista opened before me and in the distance was her familiar figure as clear and full as when I last saw her more than three years ago; how vivid my imagination is, sometimes these impressions are so powerful that I feel like ascribing to them a kind of spiritual reality.
        Mother brought me a little bunch of violets and geranium leaves from May Stevens the other day, her geranium is putting out finely, I want to go in and get a cutting from her, but we have but three mules here, one is sick and the other two are ploughing. Dr. Furness spent the evening here the other day, was quite agreeable. I keep thinking whenever I see him of his neglect of the soldiers, these couriers here say that he does not care
anything for them, and I have heard him make several remarks which I thought rather unfeeling, one notices it more by contrast with Dr. McDonough who is so kind and conscientious.
Monday, Feb. 29th.
        I rose this morning long before day and have some leisure time before breakfast to write. Last night we were joyfully surprised by Willie's coming home, we did not expect him for several days, poor fellow he was quite troubled, had worked very hard to get back to Monroe before "the twilight" should make another trip, on account of some of the railroad negroes who were on her, and who were very much dissatisfied, but when he got to Monroe he found that the twilight had come and gone, and that four of the negroes had left her at Monroe, two Willie thinks may have gone entirely, the other two he supposes to be at Millhaven. Willie had promised his squad to give them a holiday at Millhaven as a reward for their hard work, but when he went to the government clerk to get the order, he found him locked up, playing cards, and when he got access to him he would not give him the necessary order. Then Willie had no horse to come out on, he went all over Monroe and Trenton and could neither hire nor borrow one, then being in a last extremity, he went to Capt. Seale's and Lucy lent him her pony, he arrived at home about eight o'clock, quite tired; is obliged to go to Vienna today to see Capt. Oliver about the negroes, and we have nothing here to ride but three lazy mules, to ride any of them would be torture. Willie will have to borrow or hire a horse from Dr. Temple, and he hates to borrow a horse.
        The weather has changed so suddenly, yesterday morning it was very
warm, but in the evening there was every appearance of a violent storm, the wind blew cold from the north and we found a fire very comfortable indeed. It rained last night and is very chilly this morning.
        Margaret Craig came Saturday for me to alter her hat as I promised, I went to immediately and finished lining, trimming and all some hours before dark. I succeeded beyond my hopes, it was the prettiest shaped brim I have ever made, and as Miss Edgeworth would say, was vastly becoming to Margaret. We have Mrs. Temple's backgammon board and chess men now, and Father and I are learning to play chess, we are learning from the Encyclopaedia Brittanica, were so fascinated with it Saturday night that we did not read any but sat up till after ten playing chess; ten is a very late hour for us. Poor little Georgie had a chill Friday night and the fever never left him till late Saturday evening, he looks very badly, but escaped his chill last night. I hope he may get better now, his leg is improving, he walked on it a good deal yesterday, but in the evening complained very much of his knee, which was much swollen.