Friday, May 10th--
        It is quite a long time since I have written here, not because I have been very busy, not because I have been sick as my last entry makes it appear probable, only I have not felt like it, and then I might as well not write anything as such entries as my last few, thoughts and reflections indeed, they seem very sensible when I am writing them, but when I look over them afterwards I do not know whether to laugh or blush, but I must be careful not to go on with a page full of them now, for Uncle Jim is going up to the place and
I told him to call me when he was ready. I have spent the last weeks rather, taking long walks in the woods, painting a little, sewing a little, and talking a good deal.
        Well! I have been to the place and returned, Miss Mary and I, just in time to escape the dark; and after resting and brushing my hair, for supper I sit down to write a little.
        On our way up to the place I saw Mrs. Reynolds out before the door milking and stopped to speak to her, she told me some news, Carrie Young, the doctor's eldest daughter, came home with him night before last, she is six months older than I am and was to have graduated at Nashville, Tenn. next month, her Mother spent the day here Wednesday and said she did not expect her until the last of June, her coming was therefore very unexpected.
        Father went to Vicksburg Tuesday, we expect him back tonight; Uncle Moses was there yesterday, he says that they are afraid that the levees are broken up above, the river is rising more slowly and they do not apprehend an overflow.
        Our house is begun, or at least the carpenter is engaged, the spot cleared and staked and a shelter erected to work under, we are only to have three rooms this summer, one a future school room, which is to be larger and more finished than the other two, which are to be moved if Father decides to remain and erect a house upon the place; we have to move from here, by the first of next month, Father tried to get our time extended but could not, and a few days since a lady told Mother that Mrs. Bry sent her word she should be out here the first of June and wanted her house.
        Uncle Moses' and Willie's mill has commenced sawing.
        Aunt Jane has been sick for the last ten days, she suffers much,
but is not dangerous.
        Mr. Elbridge Pierce came out to the mill Wednesday, he is to help Willie; he is not very well now, having been sick with chills for some time.
Tuesday, May 14th--
        Father has staid at home three whole days, that is, he has not been anywhere except to the mill and up to the place, Oh it will be so hard to have him go away again, he says he must go to New Orleans either this evening or tomorrow. I will begin and give the record of the days since Friday: Saturday afternoon I went up to Mrs. Young's to see her daughter Carrie, whom I found very pleasant, although I had a slight feeling that my manners might seem a little brusque by the side of the tall, sedate boarding school young lady, who being just from school has not had time to settle into our country ways. She is quite tall and slender with a small face and features, dark eyes and hair and a very good complexion with no freckles; what a contrast to me, short, thick, square faced and large featured, grey eyes, reddish yellow hair and a complexion once fair but now, between tan and freckles almost brown, I do not mind all the rest, but as I looked at Carrie I said to myself as I have often said before, "if I was only tall".
        Father came up to Dr. Young's and walked home with me, Dr. and Mrs. Young and their daughter came as far as our place where we stopped to see how the builders were getting on, they have erected the frame of an out house which we are to occupy at first, but which is afterwards to serve as kitchens and servant's rooms while we live at the "school house".
        Sunday we were as usual all together, with the addition of some visitors, Mr. Pierce came up with Wilhe in the morning and stayed some
time, though he could not remain to dinner on account of an engagement in Monroe; he had just gone, and Father and I had come in here, he to look over some papers and I to read the morning service when some one came to the door and said "Mr. John Green has come", how provoking! was the first exclamation which sprang to my lips, but I checked it, and after I had finished my reading, followed Father out on the piazza.
        Mr. Green has joined a company in Madison County of this state, he is a private, the company is called the Madison Infantry; his conversation was upon the subject of Soldiers and Soldiering generally, and was on that account interesting to me; he left some time after dinner.
        Late in the afternoon, Miss Bry with a young friend called to see us, they had been spending the day with Mrs. Adams; their call was short and on both sides a very little constrained.
        Yesterday morning, Father took us all down to the mill in the carriage, one of the springs of which was broken, and which Father spent several hours in mending, his trade is that of a Blacksmith and though he has had no practice for many years he has not forgotten how to shoe a horse or weld a piece of iron. I spent the day in watching Father, looking after the children and sitting in the mill observing their motions, before we left they commenced to saw, and Miss Mary and I amused ourselves very much watching their operations.
        Uncle Moses was the only one who really understood what was to be done and it was really laughable to see him run from the boiler to the engine, then to the saw, then to the end of the log, where an inexperienced negro was turning the wrong way, then up stairs to look at the cistern; every little while vociferating orders in no very mild tone of voice,
Mr. Pierce stood attending to the engine, Willie working alternately at the saw and the log. The sawyer, a deliberate ignorant man, looking on, as if he was astonished out of his knowledge by Uncle Moses rapid movements, and last of all the negroes looking very curious and trying to do their best, though they were constantly grinning at the novelty of a steam saw mill; a few days will get them in better discipline and then we may find something to admire as well as to amuse.
        We came home in time to go up to the place and see what was doing. Father has a carpenter, two white men and a negroe up there at work on our "shanty".
        Aunt Jane has very sick today, I was quite alarmed this evening; for Mother went up to see Mrs. Axley (our carpenter's wife) whose sister's child is dead, and I did not know what I should do if she were to be siezed with one of those hysteric or fainting fits which she has had since her illness. I have interrupted my writing often to go to her and have just come away, she is in bed with a high fever, probably from her exertions in vomiting.
        Father has been at the mill all day it is time he was returning now. We had a heavy rain last night and it has been quite cool all day, we had a little fire this morning.
Tuesday, May 21st--
        Aunt Jane has gone to Monroe, she left Saturday in the carriage and bore the journey very well, Eva met Uncle Moses yesterday and he said that Aunt Jane was just as sick as she was here.
        Father returned from New Orleans Sunday night, and remained at home Yesterday, he expects to leave for Vicksburg today, but John was quite sick last night and he may not go, we were afraid last night that John
had the Cholera Infantum, but he is a little better this morning.
        Mother, Father and I went up to the place yesterday evening and from thence to Dr. Young's, we rode home in the "big waggon."
        The place is getting to look more cultivated, the shed for us is not half done yet, and those for the negroes not commenced, and we have only ten days more in this house!
        I received a letter from Miss Lou Garrett last night, she invited me to come down to Handsboro and see her, quite an impossibility.
        It is quite cool this morning, but was oppressively warm yesterday and the day before.
Friday, May 31st /61.--
        The last day of the month, a month passed with but little improvement to me, I have idled away too much time which might have been improved. Mr. and Mrs. Horne, Leila and Howell came to see us Monday night, and after a very pleasant visit, as far as we were concerned, left yesterday afternoon.
        Father has gone to Chatanooga to attend a railroad convention, he will probably go to Savannah and will be gone two weeks, a long time, and which it saddens me to think must be passed without him, he left yesterday afternoon with the Horne's, Mother accompanied them to Monroe, and visited Aunt Jane who, Mother thinks, is looking very well indeed.
        Mr. Axley (Father's carpenter) has been sick for a week. Father has engaged another carpenter who will begin work