Friday, Jan. 1st. 1864.
        Oh what a cold new years day, everything was frozen this morning, and is still frozen, the thermometer this morning stood at only eight deg. above zero; I think it was colder this morning than I ever felt it before. I was busy thawing all the necessaries for washing about half an hour after I arose, and it took us so long to warm and dress that it was nine o'clock when we eat breakfast, a pretty beginning of the year but it was so cold,
and wonderful to tell, the old clock was so cold it could hardly strike, it was amusing to hear it labouring out the strokes, at first we thought it had stopped but after an interval of at least a minute it struck again and so continued through the whole nine.
        But I was so sorry in going into the parlour after breakfast to find Mother's pretty, chaste little parian marble pitcher broken, I use it to put violets in, and day before yesterday I gathered a large and beautiful bunch and filled it with them, last night the water froze into a solid mass and split the pitcher into three pieces all held together by the ice, the same happened to my little vase, only it was worse broken. I am so sorry about Mother's pitcher, it was a gift from Aunt Mary and she prized it highly, and it was all owing to my carelessness in not thinking to pour out the water. We took the ice (shaped like the pitcher) and put it on a saucer on the what not and although there has been a large fire in the parlour since early this morning, it has not even softened. The ink I am writing with has just been thawed out. But I must stop writing and go to bed, I am afraid I shall take cold sitting up in my dressing gown.
Monday, Jan. 4th. 1864.
        My real New Year commenced this morning, not very auspiciously either, we did not get along quite smoothly in school, I am in hopes we shall do better tomorrow.
        I commenced learning John his letters this morning, the dear little fellow was so good and so funny that he set us all to laughing. Saturday it was so cold we could hardly do anything but keep warm, the thermometer
stood at sixteen in the morning, but rose to 32° in the evening; but Sunday was so rainy and cloudy that it was more disagreeable than the two cold days. Willie went down to Millhaven Saturday, returned Sunday morning, he said when he reached Millhaven his feet were frozen to his stirrups; he passed over ice strong enough to bear up him and his horse.
        Mr. Craig was here Saturday morning, said such cold had not been known since 1856, one of the steam pipes of his mill was burst by the frost. Our poor little plants have fared illy, this cold has finished what the last began, the cactus is killed down to the roots, and so is the wax plant, and all the rest. Oh for Spring to awaken life once more, to bid our dead plants to revive, and infuse new life into us as well as the vegetable world. Today has been dark and gloomy, and the atmosphere is very raw. I commenced reviewing my latin lessons today, indeed it can hardly be called a review, for I have forgotten most of what I learned. Commenced reading Gibbon's Rome abridged New Year's night, we take it instead of the original, though it is so much abridged that it hardly resembles it except in the bare facts. Dr. McDonough spent part of the morning and dined with us yesterday, said he was very much exhausted from watching and care, had slept very little for three or four nights; they have an insufficient supply of bed clothing at the hospital, and he was obliged to keep up large fires all night, and even then they suffered from cold during those intensely cold nights, they had used seven large wagon loads of wood since the Tuesday after Christmas, but this will appear probable when one knows that they keep up six fires day and night.
        I am sorry for poor Dr. McDonough, he is of a very sensitive temperament, and the sight of so much suffering must be very painful to him.
    There was a most horrid murder perpetrated in Monroe the other day; Mr. Baker's little son, only seven years old was riding through town attended by a negro boy when he was shot through the head and instantly killed, by a Mexican, in the Texas regiment. The man was delivered over to the civil authorities and his trial is to take place today, from what we can hear, he assigns no motive for this atrocious murder. Dr. McDonough says he heard that the Mexican said he had sworn to kill the first child or woman he met, but this seems to me not worthy of consideration as a motive, for he must have met women and children before, when he had been in Monroe several days. The little boy belongs to an afflicted family, his Mother and a brother died very suddenly last summer, and now the only remaining son is taken by such a dreadful death. The shock almost killed his Grand mother, his Father was absent at the time.
Wednesday, Jan. 6th.
        The cold weather still continues, we have not had such a long "bad spell of weather" this winter, this has been the pleasantest day, but that is not by any means pleasant, for this morning the thermometer stood at 20°, and I don't think it is much, if any, warmer now, it has been freezing all day in my dressing room. Yesterday was a dreadful day (as for weather I mean) cold and dark and even a little snowy in the morning, though but few flakes fell. I felt quite happy though, for we had such a pleasant morning in the school room, not a single fit of bad temper and every lesson perfect; I commenced keeping an account of lessons and behaviour and was so glad to be able to give all a perfect mark; today it was very well
indeed, but Loring was a little impatient and George quite refractory in his first lesson, though very good in his last, so I was obliged to give them imperfect marks. I was very sorry on Lory's account, for I think he tried to do well, but it is very hard for him to control his temper, he did not like it at all, but I thought if I did not distribute the marks perfectly justly they would soon lose their value. Dr. Dabbs spent the night with us Monday, he came out quite early in the evening. Oh such a man as he is, so tall and large, he is a head taller than Father, and large in proportion, with heavy beard and moustachios now quite iron gray, the children looked upon with something like awe; I like him quite well, though such a dimunitive being as I ought scarcely to venture such familiarity; he has recently returned from Texas and we were interested in his account of it. He says Washington Co. is quite thickly settled with substantial and cultivated people, and that it is a very pleasant country, his account of San Antonio was most interesting to me, he describes it as an old, irregularly built town, with most of the buildings Mexican fashion, the situation he says is picturesque and beautiful. The two rivers take their rise in two springs, each more than twenty feet deep and so clear that one can see the bottom, there are many similar springs in that part of Texas but the water is limestone and not good to drink. Oh, how I should like to go there, it must be so beautiful and so strange.
        Dr. McDonough spent last evening with us, he has an assistant now at the hospital, and consequently his labours are somewhat lightened, he seemed in very good spirits last night and the evening was quite pleasant. There is the supper bell and I must go, I have already written more than
I intended. I hope we shall have a fine day tomorrow, the glow of the sunset has not yet faded away in the west; but it is so cold, my hands are quite numb, though I am only a little way from the fire.
Saturday night, Jan. 8th.
        The cold still continues unabated since I wrote last, though we have had so many sunshiny days. I don't remember such another continuous, clear cold in my short experience. The other night we were quite surprised by a visit from Dr. Cummings; Miss Mary, Willie and I were in the parlour, Miss Mary was reading to Lory and Willie and I were playing (how dignified) when some one rapped on the door. I thought it was Eva come to "fool" us and threw the door wide open with a "come in, Miss Eva," when I could see in the darkness I discovered Dr. McDonough and was still more surprised when he said "Dr. Cummings, Miss Sarah" and then only I perceived his large figure looking up in the background. We had quite a pleasant evening, and Dr. Cummings at Mother's invitation spent the night with us, as they were very much crowded at the hospital; we also had a Texas soldier to spend the night with us.
        Miss Mary went to town today to see Mrs. DeLary, she has concluded not to take any more lessons for the present, as the roads and weather are so bad. They have a steam ferry at Trenton now, it is managed by a detail of soldiers Miss Mary said they were very polite to her, and the landing was very good indeed. I must hurry and get to bed for it is quite late, Willie returned from Millhaven today. I have been busy all day mending and
doing other little things, among others bound a shoe for Miss Mary, the first I ever did. Alonzo is making her some out of deer skin which I think will be a very good shape. Father made the last.
Thursday, Jan. 14th. 1864.
        I hoped this morning that we should at last have a fine day, when I rose the sun was not yet up, but the blue sky was streaked with beautiful, rosy clouds, and the golden glow on the horizon showed the ground all whitened with a heavy frost, the sun rose brilliantly and the early morning was glorious with bright sunshine and the fresh wind, but about 12 o'clock the sky was suddenly overcast, and since then we have not seen the sun. I was so exhilirated by the bright weather this morning, it was so pleasant after the gloomy days we have had, until this morning the sun has not shone since Sunday, there was a sudden thaw and a warm rain Sunday night, and as the frozen ground beneath would not let it sink in, the rain lay on the surface for more than a day, our yard looked more like a pig pen than any thing else; and is still very wet. Oh for Spring! I sigh for it every day, if the war lasts another year I shall desire never to see any more wintry weather, last winter and this have been so sad to me.
        John and George have both caught very bad colds, and George was quite sick yesterday and not well enough to come to school today. Loring also has a bad cold. Lory has improved very much since New Years, has not had but one of his fits of anger, though temper has several times been severely tried, the other day he was quite provoked about his geography lesson, and even threatened to run away, but he grew ashamed and could not help smiling
when I told him he was behaving just as George had done that very morning, and reminded him how silly he had thought George looked. John is progressing in his learning, is very proud to "say his school" as he calls it, he already knows five letters quite perfectly; I hope he will continue to like it as well when he is more advanced in his studies. I have commenced giving music lessons to Miss May and Eva, I am afraid I cannot be of much use to them, but may at least help to keep up their practice.
        There has been a new conscript law passed calling out all men from sixteen to fifty five; at least so it is reported; this will take Father. I don't know what we shall do without either him or Willie, it would not be so bad if it were not probable that the Yankees will be here this winter; and I would not so much mind doing without them both if they were on the other side of the river.
        Willie is preparing to join his company, (the Tensas cavalry, under Harrison) now, and will leave as soon as he is ready; he did not get a substitute, partly because on thinking it over he thought it not best, and partly because he could, there was some trouble about the final ratification of the papers, and we hear that there are to be no more substitutes, those that have them are to have their money restored by government and be called out themselves. Some rumour is heard of a proposition of peace from the Federal government, but I am afraid it is only a rumour. Oh if it were peace, honourable peace, how rejoiced we should all be.
        Miss Mary and Eva met Mr. Bowmar Barr in the road yesterday evening, he said his Mother and sisters sent their love but had not time to write; Jenny had been very ill with the measles, was just a little better when he
left. Oh how thankful I am that she was spared to her poor afflicted Mother. Mr. Barr promised to stop when he came back and I shall write by him. I must now write longer now, else I will have none of the evening left for reading. I have not done much towards my months reading yet, the days are so short and there is so much to do in them. We keep on steadily with our "Rome" it is true, read every night except those occassional ones when Dr. McDonough comes over, we have no other visitor. I have just read Lamartine's "Politique rationelle" and am as much pleased with it as with the travels, there are some things in it that seem like echoes of my own thoughts.
        The sunshine is gleaming through the window, and I hope it is the fair promise of a fair day tomorrow.
Monday, Jan. 18th.
        I have not been able to write for several days past, my usual time, just before supper, when it gets too dark to work or read has been otherwise occupied; I have been arranging Valeria's letters into little books so that I can read them easily, I find it some little comfort to read them over and over again, though sometimes they contain sentences that sadden me by bringing the past too vividly to my mind. I have been busy since Friday afternoon sewing a palmetto hat for Mrs. Temple, of course I could not work at it this morning as we were in school, but I have been busy all this evening, and am discouraged tonight at the ill success of my day's work. I believe I will take it out and sew it over again. Yesterday I could hardly sit up I felt so weak and ill, and today I have a great soreness in my chest when I cough, as I do quite often; tired and sick and ill tempered! a bad picture indeed, it fades however in this quiet room, bright with firelight, and in
the view of the flushed western sky, the reflection of the bright sun that has shone all day, and which now promises a fine day tomorrow. Yesterday was dull and rainy, and the ground is, of course, very wet, this has kept the three little boys in the house all day, and a sad trial it has been to them, they have all three dreadful colds. Loring and George could not go to school Friday and were hardly able to do so today, I was quite uneasy about Loring this morning. Mother is quite busy making some clothes for Willie, Miss Mary is making him a cap, Father is making a pair of bits for his new horse, I am doing nothing, but am going to sew some on his clothes as soon as I finish this hat. Willie has got such a fine spirited horse; poor Brandon though is gone, Willie "swapped" him besides paying eight hundred dollars boot; we were so sorry Brandon had to go, but Willie said he could not stand hard service. We have named the new horse Caesar, he is what is usually called cream coloured, or clay bank, with a white mane and tail, is tall and large but beautifully shaped, not at all heavy; his face and ears have such sensitive, spirited expression; indeed he is very high mettled, his old name was "Wild Bill" and he had been led to water for a month past, every body was afraid to ride him as he had once thrown and twice severely kicked the same man, though this was when the man was intoxicated, and treated the horse in a brutish manner. Willie wants to leave next week but will hardly be ready as the tailor has one suit of clothes still to cut; he takes his groom "Yellow Antony" with him, a sober and quiet man who has attended Willie's a horse ever since we started to Georgia, and who is very anxious to go to "the war" with him.
        Last week Col. Harrison sent here to ask Mother to take Mrs. Harrison
until he returned from the swamp, she is coming on from Texas to see her husband, has not yet arrived. A Capt. Bondurin afterward requested the same favour for his wife, but of course we could not take her as we have but one finished room besides Willie's, which is also the schoolroom.
Tuesday, Jan. 19th.
        I read last night in the "Diary of Mad. D'Arblay," "Dr. Johnston says an hour may be tedious but cannot be long," this day certainly has not been long, but it has been tedious. Our colds were all so bad that we did not have school. Miss Mary was so ill last night that I was quite anxious about her, but she was better this morning, and is still improving, my cold is very bad, though better than hers. I have been working on Mrs. Temple's hat all day, and it is now finished, all except one round which I shall do tonight, it is now a very good shape, and I am very glad indeed that I ripped it. Father shod "Caesar" this evening, I was, of course, out to see it; the horse is much better than I expected. Father is very tired tonight, no wonder, he is not well and has been working hard all day. The sun shone out brightly today, and I hope the roads will soon be good enough for us to take a ride. I have been waiting so long for good weather.
Saturday, Jan. 23rd. 1864.
        It is evening, the close of a bright, beautiful day, we have had delightful weather for some days, today it was very pleasant by an open window, it has been such a pleasant day to me too, but I must go back a little to explain it. In my last journal I said that we were all too sick to have


school,--the children continued so for some days. Thursday morning Father asked me to go into Monroe with him, I was glad to go, for I knew it would be a great pleasure, and I had no particular work to do and no school to keep me. The ride was so delightful, more so from the bad weather we have had, and from my long confinement in the house, the sky looked so blue, the air was so fresh and sweet, and the birds sang blithely in the clear sunshine. I almost expected to smell the jasmine and the honeysuckle; and then I enjoyed so much to be riding with Father, I found Mrs. Stevens and Mary both at home and we spent a very pleasant day indeed. Father came up to dinner; in the afternoon Mrs. Stevens said if I would stay all night Mary might come out with me the next day, with such a promise of course I stayed; Miss Sarah Garrett came in with her Mother in the afternoon, she sang some for us, "Lorena," and "Lorena's reply," "Paul Vivian," "Rock me to sleep," and "All quiet along the Potomac tonight," were the songs she sang, all beautiful. I have long known and loved the poem (for it is a poem) "rock me sleep," but never heard it sung before. After they went away Mary and I and little Louis took a ride up the river in the carriage, it was so pleasant, we had a quiet evening at home. In the morning we went up to Mrs. Dr. McGuire's, found her and Mrs. Kenison quite well and enjoyed our hour very much.
        On our return we found Mrs. Lemay and Miss Eliza Baker with Mrs. Stevens, Miss Eliza Baker has such a lovely face, such a pensive, sweet expression that I like to look at her, she came to see me and asked me to come to their house when I came in town, I certainly shall do so. We invited Mrs. Kenison to come out with us and after dinner we bade Mrs. Stevens
good bye and drove up for her, we went in the parlour to wait until Mrs. Kenison "assumed" her cloak and hat; and there we saw Miss Snow, a young lady who creates quite a stir in the social circles of Monroe, and who is said to have been the belle of a soirée at Mrs. Sudeling's the other night, though to me she seems to have no pretensions towards belleship, I can scarcely judge of her attractive qualities however, as I only saw her about five minutes. It was more than an hour before we landed on this side the river, the ferry was so slow, but at last we landed safely and met Willie on the bank, he was riding his new pony, a stout serviceable-looking grey, which he bought for Antony to ride, we teased him a good dealabout his horse; May named it Pompey, and I think everybody calls it so by this time. Caesar, Pompey and Antony, a distinguished trio indeed.
        This morning the sun rose bright and clear and we congratulated each other on the pleasant morning and the pleasant ride we had in perspective, and pleasant it proved to be, our horses all went so well, Mollie did not limp at all and Railroad paced like the wind. Mrs. Kenison and Mary had quite an exciting race coming home, but Railroad paced far ahead of Pompey's gallop. I was afraid of hurting Mollie's leg and came on behind, so I had a full prospect. We rode up via Mrs. Phillip's high hill and had a fine view of the valley and the woods, it was very pretty, though the fields were brown and bare and there was no green except that of the ever bright pine.
        When we came home it was eleven o'clock and we rested and looked at pictures and talked or read until dinner. Mother was not able to come to dinner, she has taken a dreadful cold like the rest of us and it gave her
such a head ache that she went to bed before dinner and has not been up since. May and Mrs. Kenison went away soon after dinner, I was so sorry they could not stay longer, we had enjoyed their short visit so much.
        Father finished Willie's bridle yesterday, it is such a nice one and the bits are so bright and pretty; Willie's last coat came from the tailor's today; it is only cut; as soon as it is made he will be ready. Oh, how sadly those words sound they make my heart sink within me, but this is not the feeling I must cherish.
Wednesday, Jan. 27th
        We have had no school this week, Miss Mary has been to Dr. Temple every morning, Eva has been sick and Mother indisposed, and we have been getting Willie ready, everything is done now, tomorrow he leaves us for camp, oh if it were a different service, an honourable service he is going to enter upon, but to be here, inactive in camp, with no prospect of usefulness, how often I say if we had only got to Georgia; but I am glad Willie did not get a substitute.
        Today we were surprised by the sight of a strange carriage driving into the yard, and more surprised when we found that the occupant was not Mrs. Harrison but Mrs. Bondurant; her husband said he had gone to Minden unexpectedly and his wife was so anxious to come down that he thought he would try and get us to take her until he could find a place for her in Monroe, Mother could hardly refuse and so she came in, I don't like her much as yet, but my opinions so often change that I attach little consequence to first impressions.
        Dr. McDonough came over yesterday evening, brought his successor at the hospital, Dr. Furness. Dr. McDonough is to go up to Mt. Lebanon with Dr. Powell. I shall be sorry for him to go, am just beginning to get well acquainted with him, and he improves on acquaintance; this Dr. Furness is a young man, I expect quite pleasant too, but cannot form an opinion from one evening when I only saw his face by candle-light. Mrs. Bondurant spoke of him today, said she thought him fine looking, he is large and well formed but I thought his face very ugly.
        The fine weather still continues, today it is almost as warm as summer. I have been setting out some jessamines, am so in hopes they will live, though I am afraid they are planted too late. Miss May has been braiding a hat for Dr. McDonough and I am now sewing it, have it almost finished.
Jan. 30th. / '64.
        Saturday night. Willie left Thursday the 28th. as he had intended for the camp but not to stay; he was all ready equipped as a cavalry man. Father had soldered an old canteen and tin cup for him, his clothes were finished and ready to put on and Mother was making a wallet for Antony; when Capt. Oliver the quarter master came up to the door, he wanted to get Father's and the railroad negroes and teams to employ in gathering corn for the government. Father told him that he could not have them unless Willie was in charge of them, and Capt. Oliver then made arrangements to detach Willie to superintend the gathering of some corn at Millhaven. This Willie thinks will occupy him about a month during which time he will
be comfortably lodged and very well fed, and above all will be doing something useful and honourable, he went to Millhaven yesterday morning, came back today, has made arrangements to commence work on Monday.
        Mrs. Bondurant left today, has procured a room at Mr. Oliver's old place, now occupied by a Capt. Marble, a refugee, it is nearer the camp and therefore more convenient than this.
        Mr. Haddicks, the courier who went home, returned yesterday. The weather has continued fair and warm till today, it commenced to rain this morning and still rains. I have been writing letters to Aunt Mary and Grandma today, and telling them about our journey has made me think of it more than usual; how strange it seems for us to be sitting quietly in this old place after so many and such various plans for moving. I also wrote to Miss Gussie Harrison again to try and find out where the Ridgills are, it seems a very slight ground for hope to find them out, but even the slight hope cheers me. I think the man by whom John Davis sent my other letter fell into the hands of the Yankees; I am very much afraid none of these letters will reach the destination. I am obliged to take the chance of sending them by a chance traveller, and do not know even when I shall have this opportunity.