Friday, Sept. 2nd. 1864.
        I have been quite sick ever since I wrote last, was very languid Wednesday, and lay on the couch all the morning, but thought it was nothing more than the debility which so often prostrates me, but in the evening I felt severe pain in my head and limbs, which prevented my sleeping during the night. Thursday morning Mother went up to consult the Dr. and as he thought my symptoms were typhoid in their character he came down immediately, but it proved nothing serious. I, of course, had to take the usual Blue mass and calomel and quinine, I had but very little fever, suffered principally from pains in my limbs and great prostration of strength, with an indifference to everything which seems astonishing in my nervous temperament. Yesterday was the first day I dressed, though I went to ride Wednesday evening. I still feel quite weak and look extremely pale and more than usually ugly.
 The weather is excessively warm, the afternoons and early part of the night are scarcely tolerable, but in the morning we have quite a pleasant breeze, the sun is burning.
        There is much sickness through the country, as usual we have our share. Loring has had another slight attack of the chills, and Eva is taking quinine today to keep hers off; she has had three. Mr. Barr and Julia spent last night with us, left this morning for Homer. Mr. Barr came down last week, Mrs. Morancy has been very sick indeed, and now has dreadful sore eyes, how thankful I am she was spared to her family and friends, her disease was very dangerous, threatened conjestion of the bowels. This has been such a very sickly season; Dr. Furness says the mortality in Shreveport is very great, as great comparatively as in New Orleans in 1853. Dr. Furness himself looks very badly, took tea with us Tuesday night before I was sick, has been over since with his colleague Dr. Melton. Miss Mary thought the latter quite agreeable, I am quite curious to see him.
Monday, Sep. 5th.
        Have really nothing particular to write this morning, but have just finished writing to Aunt Mary and felt in a humour to keep on. Father and Mother are gone to Monroe today, we are quite alone. Miss Mary and Eva are very busy, the one sewing, the other plaiting a palmetto hat. They are again getting ready to go to Homer. Mrs. Barr sent us word in a letter to Julia that she would try and get the room "fixed," and hoped to have it done in a week or two.
        I have quite recovered from my illness, took a pleasant ride in the
buggy with Willie Friday afternoon. We went to Mrs. Wynne's and called at Mrs. Craig's on our way back, found both Mrs. Craig and Margaret smiling after their hard day's work. Mrs. Craig says she will be ready to give Margaret to me again as soon as she has finished weaving a piece of cloth she has ready for the loom. They have to work very hard, Mrs. Craig and Margaret have to spin and weave all the cloth the family wear, and she has seven children, besides her husband and herself, they have no servant at all, and Mr. Craig is in the army. This is but one of many such family's in the south, once so rich and prosperous. The weather continues just as warm as ever. Dr. Furness spent the evening with us Friday, he was over yesterday morning for something to read.
Wednesday, Sep. 7th.
        Our neighbourhood is full of soldiers, several divisions came up from Alexandria the other day, and are still near Monroe, the sick are sent out to these hospitals, except Walker's division, whose sick have gone up the river somewhere; Walker is transferred to the command of some department in Texas. The two hospitals are very much crowded, but I believe there are only three dangerously ill, poor fellows, they are in want of many things, I wish we could supply them. The accommodations and provisions they have are both insufficient, one of those who has been here from the first was over last night to get some bread we had had baked for him, he said there was not room for all the men in the house, but some were lying out under the trees just on their blankets; it distresses us to think we can do nothing for them. Yesterday morning when they first came out, Mrs. Dortch
heard they were without anything to eat and she sent over some light bread and soup, they were exceedingly grateful.
        The weather has not been so oppressively warm for the last two or three days, the sky was a little cloudy last night. I hope we shall have rain soon, we are beginning to need it, so many wagons passing on the road have made it quite dusty. Willie and I took a long horseback ride Monday evening, went to Mrs. Bullock's on the Arkansas road to carry a hat Miss Mary and I made some time ago for a little orphan boy she has. I have seldom seen a more desolate looking country, for a mile the road lay through continuous woods, only here and there some deserted and ruined cabin. After we came out on the public road it was perhaps more dreary, for the houses were of the poorest sort, far between, often deserted and always ruinous, with people as miserable looking and as scarce as their cabins. We were quite tired when we reached our destination, rode up a washed and "gullied" approach to a most miserable looking habitation, a little have cultivated enclosure on one side, a lot on the other in which stood a poor bay horse, while outside under a tree languished a miserable claybank, with his back all bloody, a decrepit paling enclosed a little yard before the door where a few stunted altheas grew out of the hard ground. The house was composed of two log "pens" with a passage between and a "gallery" in front, on a little stool in this "gallery" Mrs. Bullock sat carding, while here two "gals" were near, one spinning, the other apparently just from the kitchen; Mrs. Bullock welcomed us cordially, wanted to know "what I had for the hat" and was much obliged when I told here it was a present. When we said it was late and we must go back "Why you ain't going home tonight!! Won't you stay all night with us?" What an idea, I was almost too much surprised to thank her. As
we returned home we met the most ragged and miserable looking man I ever saw, his hair and beard seemed to have been guiltless of the razor for months, and his eyes gleamed out wildly from his grizzled elf locks, his shirt was very dirty, and ragged up to the elbows, and his pants were all ragged and tattered, displaying his bare feet and legs. He carried an old black hat in his hand, this was Mr. Bullock, fit proprietor of such a place; the only flourishing thing about his domain was an excellent field of corn.
        Our ride was longer than we had expected, and yesterday I found myself perfectly lame and exhausted, went to Mrs. Dortch's in the evening, felt better; and after a good nights sleep am quite refreshed though not strong. Oh, for health and strength! Will this priceless boon ever be mine!
        I commenced the "Girondins" the other day, it has for me all the exciting interest of a novel. I could scarcely tear myself away from it yesterday, and am thinking of it all the time, have nothing else particular to do now but read. I long for the time to come when I can commence school again, I am not strong enough yet, and am afraid I shall not be able to commence until Willie and Miss Mary and Eva are gone.
        We took our cloth out today, are delighted with the success of our first piece, it looks so even and strong.
        We have received news of our daring and successful raid into Memphis, it makes me quite exultant, is equal to the gallant exploits of the ancient knights. We hear rumours that Sherman has raised the siege of Atlanta, but
nothing definite is yet known. The Yankees have lately made a raid into the swamp, burned Floyd, the seat of justice of Carroll parish, and Pinhook, a little place near it. We heard from one of the soldiers at the hospital that there was a Capt. Collins sick in a private house in Floyd whom the Yankees took out of his bed and killed, they also wounded two other sick men, this is a horrid outrage, if true, as I dare say it is. Col. Harrisson is down there somewhere, and we heard something of a fight he had had, but have nothing but mere rumours.
Thursday, Sep. 8th.
        Have been so weak and sick today that I have kept my place on the couch nearly all the time, reading the "Girondins" in the intervals of my attacks of weakness. I have a pain in my back nearly all the time, cannot imagine whence it proceeds. Am tired of lying down and not well enough to read or sew, and fly to my journal in despair. I have a good deal to write, too, yesterday morning I was sitting in my large rocking chair, propped back, and listening to Loring read, when a carriage came up containing--Mrs. Proctor! Miss Lawrence, and Miss Laura Barnes, the motive of their visit was to get Miss Mary to take part in some tableaux and plays which the D.D.D's are to give a week from tomorrow, for the purpose of buying the materials of a flag for the 17th regiment, whose colours have been destroyed in some of their fights. After some consultation we decided that it would only be a pleasure for Miss Mary to go, and so we rode down to Mrs. Dortch's in the afternoon to announce her decision spent the whole afternoon in discussions of costumes and parts; Miss Mary is to have that of a housekeeper in a very pretty little play by Miss Edgeworth, whose
scene is laid at the time of the return of soldiers from the war; the play is called the "Knapsack." Miss Mary has quite a genius for acting and I expect will make quite a success. We are going in town Saturday to attend the first rehearsal, I hope I shall feel better then, have just discovered a fever blister on my lip which they say is a good sign. Dr. Furness was over last night, I was really ill, but not sleepy, and when he came was reclining in a rocking chair in the parlour listening to Miss Mary's sweet voice. She sang several songs before she discovered that he was on the piazza; I begin to like him right well, but have no reason for this change in my opinion, and therefore do not know how long it may continue.
        We have soldiers coming in constantly, there were four here to dinner today, besides, a good many others before and since, poor creatures, we are glad to give them any pleasure in our power, at most, we can do but little for them. I expect the soldiers sewing society will soon be started again, in Monroe, Dr. Furness says the quarter master at Shreveport has plenty of cloth but can get no one to make it up, and many of the soldiers are without clothing. Two came here today to get some washing done, and two shirts made. Mother has taken both to do, is engaged on the shirts this evening. Father is busy this evening, warping another piece of cloth. Willie went to Millhaven this evening, had some personal business and in addition is going to bring back two cows for the hospital, he is much better and will soon leave for his command. Father had commenced a pair of spurs for him.
        We had a delightful and needed rain yesterday evening, and there has just been a little shower, how the leaves sparkle in the light of the declining
sun. It is so beautiful.
        The atmosphere is much cooler, I hope the summer heats are over, it is almost time. Mrs. Dortch and Mrs. Leighton were here today to bid us goodbye. One of the hospitals is very near Mrs. Leighton's, and as they come over there constantly for water and other things, she is afraid of disease, and is going away this evening. Mrs. Dortch is quite alone, as Miss Laura has gone on a visit to Miss Lawrence, and she does not like to stay after Mr. Leighton leaves, so she is going over to her place tomorrow morning. I am very sorry they are gone, we shall miss them greatly and besides they might have been of assistance about the soldiers, but they were both so unpleasantly situated they could not stay.
Friday, Sep. 16th.
        I have been very sick since I wrote last, had a chill last Friday, the first chill I ever had, and I was so vexed and mortified. I was in bed Saturday, Sunday and Monday and had a chill each day till the last, I never remember suffering so much, and my state of mind was very low and painful. I am stronger now, but my heart is like a deserted house in which the ghosts of the departed are walking always to and fro. I am so lonesome, Willie has gone, left yesterday morning, it seems as if with him were gone all the vivacity of the house. Oh my brother, my brother! I miss him every hour. Father too is absent now, left for Shreveport Wednesday, he will only be gone a few days but it seems a long time. We have just heard of the fall of Atlanta, but know no particulars, this is indeed a great misfortune, and we feel it deeply, Father had expected it but nevertheless it depressed him
much; we hope that Hood has saved his army.
        We have a young man staying with us now to recruit his health, Capt. Williams of the engineer corps, he has improved very much since he came last Saturday, I like him very much, is very quiet in his manners and spends most of his time in reading. I feel too weak to take much interest in anything, sit idle a great deal of the time; am taking a preparation of iron, by Dr. Furness' advice, and hope it will improve my health.
        There has lately been a sudden change in the weather, yesterday morning on rising we found it almost cool enough for fires, this morning it is the same; the golden rod begins to blossom on the hillsides, and a slight autumn tinge appears an the edges of the limbs; this weather reminds me of that we had on our trip to Georgia, the crisp, rustling breeze whispers to me of all the pleasant scenes in my life, it brings to mind all my friends.
        I have been taking a walk this morning, exercise is essential to my health, I am determined to walk every day hereafter; the sky is so deeply blue, the dark foliage of the pines defines itself so clearly against, all the other trees glisten in the sunlight and every spear of grass and little flowering sprig is so full of beauty that a walk is a series of constantly recurring beauties; but these beauties awaken only memories of other far remembered scenes and people that have vanished. Can I never free myself from this life in the past, which from earliest childhood has so clung to me? I do not try as I ought, it is such a seducing pleasure though I know it is enervating and idle. Father received a letter from Mr.
John Green Sunday he was quite well. I sent a letter to Valeria by a gentleman going across the river; directed it to Selma, at hazard. Oh, may it only reach her, and bring me the answer for which I hunger daily.
Monday, Sep. 19th.
        Father surprised us early Sunday morning, we had not expected him until tomorrow, were so glad to see him, though he had only been gone three days; I think his journey did him good, his spirits are much better. He met a gentleman who left Macon, Georgia, since the evacuation of Atlanta, he said that it was not considered a very serious loss to us, and that it was there confidently expected that we should have peace in a few months. I hope it may be so. Every body that comes from the east side of the river are in fine spirits, they have not our inaction to depress them. I have improved so much, am well enough to take a walk every morning, went more than two miles this morning, and don't feel tired. The weather is still cool and bracing, my spirits mount with my health, that dreadful and unaccustomed visitant ennui is quite gone. Our guest, Capt. Williams, improved a great deal, but took a little slip back yesterday. I continue to like him though he vouchsafes very little conversation to me and that only when he can't help it. I suppose he feels sick and cross though he does not show it, I am determined to become acquainted with him, with or against his will. We have not heard from Willie yet, it is only four days since he left, but it seems like weeks, I miss him hourly.
Saturday, Sep. 24th. 1864.
        This time last year we were on our journey to Georgia, this very morning a year ago we were in the beautiful, but deadly Lafourche swamp, and Father was suffering such severe pain as makes us shudder to look upon; yet I look back upon this time with regret, the accidents and troubles of our journey are softened by time and distance and the excitation of exercise, and novelty, and bright hopes stand out in fascinating colours, when I look back upon the past year so full of uncertainties and trials, of miserable doubts and impious repinings, I am filled with thoughts so mingled and various that I that I cannot disentangle them. I am thankful for the restored health which God has been pleased to vouchsafe me, for the past week my strength and spirits have been better than I have rejoiced in for months, no terrible morning weakness, no miserable depression. I have felt the blood flowing bright and clear in my veins.
        Captain Williams left us Wednesday morning for his command, I sent a letter to Willie by him; we missed him very much the day he left, but have gotten accustomed to his absence as easily as we got accustomed to his presence. The day before he left he conversed more with us than ever before, and I found him a most intelligent and interesting companion, he had the sensible quality of not speaking unless he had something to say, and so visible was this peculiarity that I felt no embarrasment in sitting for half an hour or more without any remark at all.
        Thursday evening Dr. Furness came over, I think I never saw, or suffered, so dull and sleepy a man in my life, he appeared to be continually hammering his brain for something to say, and after all did not succeed in striking
any sparks, he passed his hand over his forehead every now and then as if he had a bad headache, indeed he looked like it, and I think we were all relieved when he took his departure, I have not yet had the pleasure of gratifying my curiosity by a sight of Dr. Melton.
        Miss Mary and I went into town Thursday to attend a rehearsal of the tableaux; Miss Hannah Bry sent to request a seat in the carriage and when we arrived at Major Bry's we found we were also to have the pleasure of the company of a Miss Keene, we bore our trials with exemplary fortitude I trust; the dust was very great and the ferry troublesome to cross; when we reached the rendezvous of the D. D. D's there were but two young ladies there, and but one more came. After waiting about an hour we left without doing anything, and with the impression that there would be no tableaux at all. We drove down to Maj. Bry's with Miss Hannah, called on Miss Lou Hanna on our return, and when I got to Mrs. Stevens and met Mary's affectionate welcome I felt like a weary mariner arriving at the long deferred port. The rest of the day passed pleasantly and quickly. Mary was just recovered from an attack of the chills, she looked quite badly, we had an animated talk of some length about the soldiers who recently passed through here, and about what Mary had seen of them. She actually had the honour of taking tea with Gen. Prince Polignac, and walked some distance with him for escort. She says his head just came to her shoulder and he is the ugliest little man she ever saw; I had just heard similar description from Capt. Williams. We called at Mrs. Dr. McGuire's on our way out, to borrow some books for Mother. I also got "Hervey's meditations," have read but little in it yet but like that little very much. Am quite advanced in my
"Girondins" my interest seldom flags, I read a great deal in it every day. Am now reading "Guy Mannering" aloud, I find it interesting and entertaining, as a novel of Scott's could not fail to be. The evenings are so cool now that we have to leave the piazza and sit in the parlour; yesterday was warmer than it had been for the past week, we had rain in the morning, and also this morning early, it was very much needed. Mother is in bed this morning with a bad headache, Father has gone to Monroe. Father and I took a ride yesterday afternoon, Railroad was quite lively and I had a pleasant ride. Sent a note to Willie this morning, how I wish we could hear from him, we hear rumours of skirmishes and fights up in Arkansas, but nothing definite. We have heard no more from the East. Father is counting the days to the election in November, he says if McClellan is elected he thinks peace will follow. May a merciful Providence grant that Lincoln, that disgrace to humanity, may not continue in power.
Tuesday, Sep. 27th.
        Yesterday morning Father went to Monroe and on his return gave me a letter from my dear Valeria, how I have wished for this letter, now that I see it before me on my desk I can scarcely believe it has so recently left her hands. Oh, how hard it is for me to realize the dreadful news which it contains. Mr. Ridgill is dead, my beloved friend is fatherless, what bitterness is not comprehended in that dreadful word. My heart is full of sorrow for her; her letter is very hurried, she wrote at a venture, not expecting that her letter would reach me, how glad I am she wrote, but Oh, how sad her letter is. I wrote immediately on receiving it, I could not