April 5th. Tuesday night.
        I have not had time to write any here since the month came in, on the first we had, as usual, plenty of "April fools," some very successful, others very nonsensical. Saturday was a very happy day, the brightness and the warmth of the weather made us incline to joyfullness, and then about ten o'clock in the morning we were delightfully surprised by Willie's coming, he was in fine health and good spirits, and we were so glad to see him. In the afternoon he drove me out in the buggy to try his new mare, she trotted very well and we took a very pleasant drive indeed. Loring and I rode part of the way to Trenton with Willie, we were very sorry he could not have stayed all night.
        Sunday the weather was cold, cloudy and stormy, we had a short but beautiful storm of wind and rain in the evening, after which the sun set quite clear.
        Yesterday we had quite an early breakfast for Father to go down to Millhaven, we missed him very much yesterday and today, and were rejoiced when soon after dinner today we heard the buggy. Willie came with Father, is going to stay until day after tomorrow when he leaves for Homer. The Twilight is going to be returned to it's owner, and Willie reports to Capt. Oliver, the quarter master, at Homer. I shall thus have an opportunity of
sending a letter to Mrs. Morancy, I know she will be glad to see Willie.
        Willie and I took a very pleasant ride together this evening, I always enjoy a ride with him so much, the woods are beginning to sport their spring robes now, the dogwoods which were not blighted by frost are now dazzling white in the sunlight, our hillside is brilliant with them, the jessamines are falling fast but the honeysuckles are just coming into bloom.
        Father brought us some bad news today, Mr. Peterson has gone to the Yankees, I was astonished and sorry to hear it, he is not an American, and has not been here many years, this may be an excuse. We have so many disloyal persons amongst us now, the public sentiment in Louisiana is very much demoralized, patriotism is a virtue out of fashion and one that is looked askance at, the universal sentiment in that this side of the river at least, is lost to us, and there is even now and then a low murmur that we will soon be altogether subjugated. Oh, we don't think enough of what subjugation really means, far from us be such a thought. Father says he saw a man today from the other side the river who said that all were hopefull over there and fighting on with a good heart. Oh, how I wish we were there.
Saturday night. April 9th. 1864.
        This may prove to have been a memorable day in our lives, for today our long deferred fears are realized, the Yankee gunboats have come up to Monroe and the Yankee pickets are out an each side of the river, we know no particulars as to the number of boats or the men, and we can only vaguely
conjecture what is the motive of their coming, but I must go on and give a connected account of the events of the past few days. First, Wednesday was John's fourth birthday, and it was also the day set for shearing the sheep, so the children begged a holiday which I was very willing to grant, for Willie was going into Monroe in the morning and I wanted to wash his palmetto hat and do sundry other little things while he was gone. The morning passed quickly and pleasantly and the afternoon brought Willie with the welcome announcement of a visit from Mary Stevens and Mrs. Tucker on the morrow.
        Thursday morning rose bright and clear, and it was only ten o'clock when our visitors came, we had a very enjoyable day. I am too sleepy now to say any more about how it passed, in the latter part of the morning the sky clouded over and soon after dinner the rain commenced and continued all the evening. I was very glad of an excuse to keep May all night, but while I rejoiced for my own sake felt badly on Mrs. Stevens' account, for she was alone with James and Louis. Mary and Mrs. Tucker went back early in the morning with an appointment from me to spend the day with her today.
        I worked steadily all day at sewing Father's hat, but could not quite finish it. Last night was Willie's last night at home and we sat up quite late. This morning we were ready for our visit to town, soon after breakfast the carriage which Father has just mended drove up and Willie stood at the door to tell us goodbye, dear brother, when shall we see him again, our hearts would have been sad if we could have foreseen this Yankee expedition, as it was we thought we should see him soon again, and felt quite happy as we drove slowly along in the bright sunshine, admiring at every
step some new beauty in the opening springs, now it was the bright green beech trees, now the brilliant white dogwoods or some fragrant clump of honeysuckle and again the glistening green huckleberry leaves or the tiny flowers in the grass, thus happily and quietly we rode along until we came to Trenton and were greeted by the alarming intelligence that the Yankee gunboats were a short distance below Monroe. We kept on to the lower ferry, however, left the carriage on this side, and crossed the dancing little waves in a skiff, went up to Mrs. Stevens' found them excited and somewhat distressed. James was quite ill, had been taken with bleeding at the nose and all efforts to check it had been unsuccessful for several hours, it had at last ceased, but he was very weak. Mrs. McGuire had gone to the plantation, and Mrs. Stevens had no one to advise with. I felt quite calm, but Miss Mary was very nervous, wanted to come back home immediately. After going down town and hearing particulars Father thought we had best come back, so I got a geranium cutting from May, one of the chief objects of my visits and we can back. The bright morning had changed to cloud, and a cold wind as we drove home, we shut one of the carriage windows, drew our cloaks closer about us, and thus we came on slowly. Miss Mary went to sleep, father to reading, and I to reverie, the way seemed short to me, of course Mother was much surprised to see us back again, and still more so to hear the cause.
        The stage did not go in to Monroe this evening, was within a few miles of it when they heard the news and turned back, the only passenger on board came here to spend the night, and from him we heard that the Yankees have come. Lieut. Pugh has come in since I commenced writing, he says there are three gunboats, two barges and two transports, he is camped very near here tonight with a squad of pickets. I am so sleepy I can't write any more.
 I forgot to say in my journal the other day that the couriers left here on the fifth of this month.
Sunday evening, April 10th. 1864.
        This has not been at all like Sunday; fatigued by the excitement and exertion of the past weeks, I slept until much later than usual this morning. Lieut. Pugh and his brother came to breakfast, which was quite late, his brother tolerably tall, with fair complexion and blue eyes and a pleasant modesty, open countenance, quite different from Lieut. Pugh who is quite small, black hair and eyes and a rather swarthy complexion, which however, does not give him a manly air, his manners are quite pert and somewhat affectedly careless, soon after breakfast Father had Prince make the ambulance ready to drive him in to Trenton with the gentleman who stayed here last night; his name is J. A. Roberts, he is going to Virginia where his friends are, had been living for a good many years in Arizona, but took refuge in Texas soon after the war commenced, his health is very bad, and he shows it. He had such a large, heavy blanket, woven by the Narvahoe indians, it is as thick as an ingrain carpet, and very prettily striped with white, black and blue, it was large enough for two blankets, being sewn in the middle, he said it was too heavy for him and gave half of it to Father, it is quite an acquisition, so good in travelling. The whole blanket before it was ripped weighed forty five pounds. Father asked the gentleman to write to Uncle David after he got into Mississippi or Georgia and tell him that we were well, he said he was not willing to take any letters, in case of being searched by the Yankees; wanted to try and get them
to take him dawn in one of their transports.
        We grew very impatient as the hours passed on to one o'clock, it was nearly two when Father came, accompanied by a strange man, and with his hands quite bloody, we were all excitement until he could sit down and tell us the story. He said he had gone on very quietly until he nearly reached Trenton, there Mr. Craig, who was very close behind, called out that he heard the Yankees were coming up to Trenton, and he turned round and came back home. Father however, thought he might as well go on and did so, when he arrived opposite Mrs. Seale's he saw a party of Yankees, thirteen in number, with some uncommissioned officer at their head, they were talking to a knot of ladies, among whom were Mrs. Seale and Lucy. Father stopped then too, and the officer began to ask him if he had seen a Confederate officer mounted on a white horse pass up the road. Father told him he had not seen a white horse since he left home. It appears that a Captain Brigham, said to be a bravo sort of a man, had been "cavorting" round below Trenton in sight of the gunboats, had been seen from them, and was the cause of this party having come on shore. After speaking to the yankee a little while Father asked Mrs. Seale if she would not like to take a ride down to the Monroe ferry, she took her bonnet and went with him. Father did not go over to Monroe, left Mr. Roberts at the ferry and returned up to Trenton. When he got up into the town he found that this party of Yankees were going into the stores and houses, not private dwellings, searching for this Captain Brigham and for arms, they found some old muskets and some rusty swords and two kegs of powder, went into the post office and took out all the letters except those addressed to ladies, (a rare act of courtesy indeed).
  Father stopped up in Trenton, sat there in the ambulance to see what was going to happen, them was a Mr. Turner in the post office who had come down to Trenton that morning with his buggy, they took his buggy to carry their arms and powder down to their gunboats with, Mr. Turner asked them to send it back, they said they would not, but if he chose he might ride down to the boat and bring it back himself, so he got in beside the young yankee who was driving. In the mean time one or two Yankees had gone up the road a little way, and as they returned Prince (who was walking up the street) overheard them say to the commander that there were some Confederates up the road, he said they would go down and gather some horses and then go after them. Prince also overheard one say to the officer, "Why don't you take that ambulance to carry the arms down," he replied that that gentleman was using it, and he would not trouble him. Well, having taken two horses from citizens who were there, they all went down towards Monroe, and Father and Prince faced slowly back towards home. They had advanced only a few yards when a loud report which they mistook for a gun from the boat arrested their progress, they waited for further developments, pretty soon the two horses the Yankees had taken came running back. Father thought they had been frightened and thrown their Yankee riders, pretty soon they heard another report, a real gun this time, and in a few moments here came one or two of our soldiers saying they had had a skirmish. At first Father did not believe it but Lieut. Pugh soon overtook him, and he found that it was really so. It happened thus, as the Yankees went on down with the buggy in front, our men, some dozen or so on horseback, dashed round the corner and the parties met, unexpectedly I reckon to both, perhaps our
men might have taken the Yankees prisoners as the latter were on foot and taken by surprise, but the buggy with the citizen in it arrested their fire, in the words of Mr. Turner "The horse turned right round towards the river, the young Yankee either jumped or fell out of the buggy. Young Pugh called out 'charge', some of the men discharged their guns, the keg of powder exploded between my legs where it was sitting, the horse plunged and I jumped out. I thought I would light on my feet but came flat down on my face, and when I picked myself up and looked round I expected to see at least two or three lying dead on the ground, but not one either Yankee or Confederate was to be seen. I don't know where the Yankees went to, some of them might have jumped over the bluff, but I didn't think to look and see, and had I thought I wouldn't have looked for fear they would shoot up at me!" how the powder came to explode no one knows, or how the horse got his leg broken, it appears that none of the Yankees were hurt. One of our men was severely wounded, he was supported on his horse out to a house about three miles from Trenton. Father laid him on a bed and examined his wound, it was just above the hip. We heard yesterday evening that Dr. Whyte said it, the ball, had passed through the liver and that his recovery was doubtful; it is sad to think of a life thus lost for worse than nothing. The only effect upon the Yankees after their fright was over was to exhasperate them, they threatened to shell the town but afterwards replied to the entreaties of some of the citizens that on reconsideration they would not do so unless our forces returned, that "if they saw a rebel soldier there again they would certainly shell the place," rebel indeed, proud invaders, when shall we teach you the bitterness of that word again!
  Mrs. Temple and Miss Anna Moore came over in the afternoon; about four o'clock we were surprised by seeing Major Waddill ride up, he had come to Monroe on business not expecting to meet the Yankees. I suppose his business is of a somewhat important and difficult sort, I don't know what. Mother and Father invited him to spend the night, he went to meet an appointment but returned about dark. Is a very elegant and agreeable gentleman, my short acquaintance with him disposed me to like him very much, he is very fond of his family, and is a great money maker, looks quite jaded, probably from fatigue and anxiety combined.
        We are preparing for quite a battle an Red River now, probably it has taken place before this, I scarcely dare to hope much. Oh, if we could but gain it, it would so reanimate the sinking spirits and revive the hope that is almost dead, I mean always on this side the river, from what we hear we have no right to distrust our troops on the other side. We hear that Forrest and Morgan are again doing brilliant things, Forrest has lately taken and destroyed Paducah, Columbus, Ken. and Union City.
        It was nearly dark this evening when Lucy Seale and Mrs. Norriss rode up on horseback, I was alarmed, thought they were coming here for refuge from some impending evil. Lucy looked the picture of troubled alarm, wanted to know if Father had an ox wagon, or any kind of wagon here that he could send for their trunks, they were afraid that our men might go back there and that the town would be shelled. Father had nothing but a cart, and promised to send it in tomorrow morning. Mrs. Norris had been in to Monroe, that morning, said that the gunboats were not going to stay but a very few days, the river is falling so fast as to render a longer delay dangerous.
  Capt. Frank Garrett and a Lieut. Hardy were taken prisoners, were about town in citizen's dress and someone, I suppose, informed of them, it is a disgraceful thing they ought to be heartily ashamed, but Mrs. Norriss says they took it very pleasantly, probably they did not reflect that if the Yankees chose they might consider them as spies and hang them instead of parolling them an they promised, and as they very probably expected when they put themselves in the way. Father brought me a very cordial, sweet note from Miss Sallie Brantley in answer to one I wrote her inviting her to visit us, she was on the eve of starting for Minden on a visit of three months, said she would with pleasure accept the invitation when she returned home in July.
Monday, April 11th.
        Father went into Trenton this morning in company with the cart that went for Mrs. Seale's trunks, Mrs. Seale concluded not to send them out today. Father did not go over to Monroe, says the Yankees appear to be in considerable commotion caused probably from the surprise yesterday. Father said there were a good many negores on the bank with their bundles who had run to the Yankees. He says he saw some ladies and children carrying chickens to the boat to barter for coffee. Sandy, who drove the cart, was on the bank when the skiff came on shore to get the chickens, says the Yankees gave one pound of coffee for four chickens. Sandy asked the negro who was in the skiff if any body could go on board that boat that chose, (meaning the gunboat) the negro said no, asked Sandy if he wanted to go to stay, Sandy told him no, that he had had no hand in bringing on the war, and


was not going to have anything to do with it! Maybe none of our negroes will go, but we don't know what might happen, it would I feel be far better for them to stay with us, but they don't know that and I don't blame them in the least for being dazzled by the false idea of freedom, ours go on just exactly as usual as yet, one who was hired in Monroe is gone to them we hear, the same who got drunk and was so impertinent to Willie the day we started to Georgia, and whom we sent back from the La Fourche.
        There are six gunboats and no transports we hear now, the two that were sent up for the Twilight returned today without her, and sent up a smaller boat, I suppose of course the rest will remain until this one comes down. It is such a warm, delightful afternoon, the view from my open window is beautiful, the trees now in their prettiest spring garb, the foliage just enough developed to present charming varied tints of delicate green, and to let us look through the moving screen to new beauties beyond. The dogwoods have not yet faded, but the leaves on them are fast mingling green with the hitherto spotless white. Oh, how beautiful the earth is, well may we exclaim "man alone is vile."
        I do not feel at all well, think I must have taken cold, my face burns and my throat is quite parched, and I have a feeling of nausea and slight lightness of head, which is very disagreeable.
        We went into school again this morning, after our long recess. Margaret Craig did not come as I expected, probably on account of the Yankee excitement. I do not feel at all afraid, am just beginning to realize that they are indeed in Monroe, we have no fear of their coming out this far.
Tuesday, April 12th. / 1864.
        I have determined to keep a faithful journal of all I see and hear
while the Yankees remain at Monroe. Maj. Waddill left here yesterday morning after breakfast to meet some gentlemen on business, he returned with them, there were three, not long afterwards, and after spending an hour in apparently earnest and animated conversation they all left together, soon afterwards Maj. Waddill's servant returned with a note from his master stating that they were going on an expedition where they not be likely to meet with much refreshment for the "inner man" as he expressed it, and would be obliged if she would give his servant some bread and meat to cook for them, it appears that this note was only a polite subterfuge to avoid asking for a lunch for his hungry companions. Emmeline told Mother afterwards that she had heard one of the gentlemen say he had had nothing to eat for many hours. Mother was very sorry that she had not known it when they were here; she had sent them a bountiful lunch, however ready prepared, supposing that they were really going on an expedition. Maj. Waddill returned at night, said that one or two of those gentlemen with him lain in the woods all night with nothing for breakfast but a glass of buttermilk and a crust of biscuit. Mr. Ludeling from Monroe had come out to see Maj. Waddill in the morning, said that he was never placed in such a humiliating position in his life, as when in town, he was sitting in his office one day since they came, when a Yankee came up an the pavement before the door and walking up to Major Bry who was standing there made him an abolition speech, said that he was an abolitionist of the deepest dye, that there were four classes of men, the aristocrats or slave holders, the negroes, or slaves, the free negroes, the mules and lastly the poor white men, that he wanted to abolish the slaveholders, exterminate the slaves so as to give an opportunity
for the poor white man to rise, this with a good deal more in the same formed his speech. I dare say these are the true sentiments of many a one, 'tis not the welfare of the poor negro they seek. They are taking all the cotton they can find without pretending to pay for it, One or two companies of our men were going about burning all the cotton a week or two ago, but the citizens were at that time very much opposed to it and a good deal was hidden away. Maj. Waddill is keenly interested about cotton, being the owner of a large quantity, says the Yankees have probably gotten two hundred bales since they came. Maj. Waddill says he heard that they forced away one of Mr. Lasar's negroe men, though he begged to be allowed to remain with his master, this is I suppose an unusual case, at this raid I mean, I dare say by far the greater proportion have gone willingly, poor creatures, I pitty them from my heart.
        Lieut. Pugh was here this morning, it was after we had gone into school and I did not see him, brought a fine turkey which he asked Mother to have cooked for them, they took it from Mr. Stamper, an old countryman back here, they met his this morning going in to the river with bale of cotton, some eggs and this turkey to trade with the Yankees of course, took the turkey themselves and I suppose turned him back with the rest.
        This evening a man came over here from the Lieut. for a pair of scissors to cut hair, and soon afterwards another came to know if rather had any hand cuffs, that they had two Yankee prisoners. I am afraid Lieut. Pugh is not very trust worthy, I mean for a commander, he appears too rash, this taking of the prisoners may very likely bring the Yankees out here, unless they suppose our men in much stronger force than they really are. Never mind
we can be brave I hope in actions as well as words. A man from the Company of pickets has just come to return the scissors, says that the men were not taken from the Yankees, but are two men whom they took up on the road, who say they belong to our artillery and whom they suppose to be deserters. Lieut. Pugh's company, or rather squadron, is camped over here at Dr. Young's house. I am so glad they caught those deserters how mean they must be, they were probably going to these gunboats. They say that several men from our guerilla band over in the swamp have deserted and come in to the Yankees.
        I have been playing chess and writing so long this evening that I shall not have much time to finish the cuffs Mother left for me to do, I have not read any french this week, have been sewing, and Mother has been reading "No Name" to us, this is a book Miss Maggie Calderwood sent me the other day when I returned "Say and Seal." I had hardly time to read it, but could not resist the temptation as it is by Wilkie Collins. I am as much interested in it as I was in the "Woman in White." The weather brilliant and warm, the hills around are beautiful, I can find no words to express the enchanting picture like loveliness of the fresh and varied tints, when I look out I can't take in the scene as I want to do, and I sigh to think how short a time it will last.
Friday night, April 15th.
        I have allowed two days to pass without writing the news, the Yankees are gone, and I have been so busy that I have not been able before to chronicle this great event. We heard the news Tuesday evening and on Wednesday morning Father and Mother went to town, the Yankees had indeed
gone, taking all the cotton they could get, and from five hundred to a thousand negroes, almost everyone in Monroe lost their house servants, and some lost all on their plantations. Mrs. Stevens had not one house servant left except her old carriage driver, Cuffy. Mrs. Tucker's little servant girl did not go, but every one of Mrs. Stevens did. The day that Mother was there Mrs. Tucker and Mary prepared the dinner, their servants did not leave until Monday night and left everything prepared for breakfast. Scott was very honourable, she has her Misstresses Silver in her charge but took none of it away with her, I am so sorry for Mrs. Stevens, as I said before she has many companions in misfortune. Mrs. Garrett is the only lady who lost none. Five of the railroad negroes left, three of whom we thought the most faithful, Nate, Little Cuffy and Ike, who all, especially Nate, behaved so well on our way to Georgia. I believe he was promised a Captaincy, perhaps that allured him, we lost but one negro, Little Emmaline, who was hired in Monroe with her husband, a railroad boy, and left with him. Before leaving town the Yankees burned the Court house, the railroad bridge over the Ouachita and one other small public office, they did not trouble private property at all except to take all the cotton they could find. I was surprised to hear of so many negroes going, it is said that one woman killed her little baby, who was very sick, and she knew would keep her from going, many left their little babies on the plantation to go.
        But let us leave this sad and sickening topic for one very dear and happy to me. Wednesday evening Eldridge came back from Homer and brought me two letters, one from Willie and one from Mrs. Morancy. Willie's letter was very delightful to me, is so affectionate, he says he arrived in Homer
about eleven o'clock Sunday morning and had gone to Church, then on the back of the envelope he says that he had been to Church that night and that he wishes that I could be there this week, they were going to have preaching every night. Oh, my dear Brother, are my long cherished hopes, my daily prayers to be realized, shall I see him happy in the way that I have desired for him with a great desire. God grant it may be so, I wish no better thing for him than that he may feel the love of Christ in his heart.
        Mrs. Morancy's letter was affectionate as ever, she tells me that Willie's staying with them, says Mrs. Barr would take no excuse, she writes of the happiness of Mr. Bowmar Barr and his wife in their baby boy, I feel with them in this deepest, purest joy, it seems strange to think that Mr. Barr is no older than Willie.
        Mrs. Mays spent the day with us yesterday, came for me to sew her hat. I was showing her about how to sew one for her little bay and had so many interruptions that I only finished the crown of her hat, have not worked any on it today, but shall try and finish it tomorrow. It has been disagreeably chilly today, fires were comfortable even at noon, Father and I took a ride this evening, saw such a beautiful haw tree in full bloom and gathered a quantity of the fragrant white wreaths, some of them are shedding their perfume through my room, combined with that of a rose that Mary sent me the other day, my little geranium is living and growing, my Valeria, it means so much to me as I look on its two delicate little leaves I am scarce refrain from caressing them, am only with held by the thought that my caress might hurt it. But my writing is becoming almost illegible, my eyes are
tired and I must prepare for bed.
Wednesday, April 20th.
        I did not know so many days had past since I opened my journal book, I have been intending to write every day but have not had time. Monday I received a long letter from Willie by Maj. Waddill and sat down to answer it immediately after dinner, it gave me great pleasure, described his habits of spending his time, was going that evening to Mrs. Bennett's to tea and from there to Church. I was surprised by a letter from Miss Mattie Newcombe it was full of expressions of affection for me, of truly kind feeling for Willie, I have just been answering it. Shall I say what lies on my mind, yes surely here; I don't like her extravagant sentimentalities to me when she has once or twice seemed wanting in common attention to my feelings and seems often constrained in my presence. I have been disappointed deeply in her and I cannot sincerely respond to extravagant expressions, yet I do feel truly grateful for hers and her Mother's kindness to my dear Brother, and I know Mrs. Bennett would not leave anything undone for his comfort if he needed it, so how could I write otherwise than affectionately to her, and how could I do otherwise than say that I wished very much she would come and see us. I do like her very well and I should like to see her, and after their warm welcome to Willie I should be unkind and ungrateful not to extend the same to her, but it troubles me that I have written to her as "My dear friend" than which I could apply no better save to my dear Valeria. But let me take up events again. Margaret Craig came to school Monday, I find her well behaved and intelligent as I expected, and better informed than I hoped.


She is the most deficient in reading, writing and arithmetic, the reading can soon be improved, the fault is chiefly in having been taught to assume a stilted, unnatural manner. The writing will be improved by practice, the arithmetic is the most serious difficulty, but she is attentive and desires to learn. I have put her with Eva who is just commencing both written and mental arithme (I had to put her back in the latter) and if Margaret is any slower to comprehend than Eva it will be a wonder.
        Mr. Barr was here yesterday evening, brought a little note from his sister, asked me to go up with him tomorrow. I should like to go but don't feel that I ought. Finished Mrs. May's hat Saturday after a hard days work. Have been busy at odds and ends, and writing letters every afternoon this week, hope to commence reading again tomorrow. We have finished "No Name" some parts of it we very fine, but as a whole I do not like it as well as "The Woman in White."
        Miss Mary, Lory and I had a delightful walk yesterday evening for flowers, we gathered our hands full of Haw, Black haw and honeysuckle, and they were so beautiful. We have three vases full in the parlour, and I have two boquets in my room, one of wild flowers and one, such a sweet one, of roses, violets, and a lovely cluster of white haw, our beautiful and sweet roses are blooming finely now, I have gathered six or seven in the last three days, must go now to water my geranium.
        I am a little troubled about my dear Father, he looks badly, has a dreadful cold in his head. I hope his spirits will rise after this great victory at Mansfield, it is a second Manassas oh! how thankful I am, it was so unhoped for, we did not dare to hope even to check the Yankees, and
now we have triumphed, driven them back, it is said they have blown up two of their iron clads and it is thought that perhaps the whole fleet will be lost. The Red river is falling so rapidly and they have obstructed it near the raft by sinking one of their boats which grounded there coming up. The traitor Governor's wife was on board the transport with a number of officers wives, who counted on a pleasant excursion to Shreveport, what a disappointment to them.
Sunday evening, April 24th.
        I am often troubled about the course I ought to pursue towards the children in my daily intercourse with them. I have been thinking much about it today and I am afraid I have not been kind enough to them, I don't mean that I have ever failed in love to them, indeed it is this very love, this intense desire that they should grow up virtuous, happy and well bred which makes me so eager to help them, and I see so many things every day to reprove that I fear I have reproved them too much, perhaps I have been too rigid, and have not made allowances enough. I ought to make them when I am so full of imperfections myself. I will try to be more loving in manner as well as in heart. I will try not to use authority but persuasion and to pass over slight faults however irritating they may be to me. Oh, I do so want to make them happy and yet I often seem to produce a contrary effect. What can I do? I can trust in my God, I can try always to keep my peace with Him, if I could do this I should never go wrong.
Monday April 25th.
        This has been a delightful day and how sweet is its close, the last rays
of the sun are streaming in at my open window and glistening on the foliage which clothes the hillside with almost the luxuriousness of summer verdure, for the woods look like it was summer, though it has for several days been quite cold, we need rain and had great hope of it Friday and Saturday but it is quite again now. Saturday Father, Miss Mary and I went into Monroe, we spent a very pleasant day, we enjoyed seeing the gardens all flushed with roses which seemed doubly beautiful to us because we had seen so few. I went to see Miss Maggie Calderwood when we first went in, spent a very pleasant hour or two with her and then drove to Mrs. DeLary's for Miss Mary but found her at Mrs. Jos. McGuire's, stopped a few minutes there. Miss Mary had determined to spend the day with her, while we were looking at the roses in the garden Father and Mr. Duvall walked up. I had not seen Mr. Duvall before since we left him at Millhaven. When I drove up to Mrs. Stevens Mary met me at the door with her usual sweet smile and kiss, the rest of the morning was passed in pleasant conversation and in looking at their garden, which was one bed of bright flowers.
        All the morning was not thus passes though, I heard some sad news, the death of Mrs. Dortche's brother, Capt. Martin, in the last battle, and several others that I knew by name but not personally. I had no friend to be killed it is true, but my heart bleeds for those who have been so bereaved by the many, many killed in that bloody fray which has preserved to us our peaceful homes. Captain Martin died nobly, the colour bearer had been three times shot, as the third one fell he stood near him and raised the flag in his hand, he had not made more than three steps before he fell, two balls had penetrated his stomach and one his shoulder, he lived for
several days, said that he had wished if it were necessary to give his life for our cause, and that if he saw the way before him again with the end in full view he would not hesitate. Poor Mrs. Dortch, his glorious death cannot now comfort her, she must think those sad words "He died in his glory, but oh! he has died."
        We hear many rumours but know nothing certainly about the position of the enemy, the time before is anything but a time of rest, the war cry resounds on all sides, its distant notes come from Virginia, from Kentucky and from the shores of the Atlantic, while nearer home its thunders appall us. What has this year in store for us. Oh that it may bring peace, how calm, how soft this evening hours, the distant cooing of the dove, the chirping of the little chickens under my window, the bright rays which shed a soft dying light over all, how can believe that this evening so many are losing in mortal strife, or groaning and tossing on the wounded soldier's pallet.
        My room is perfumed by a glass full of roses and pinks on my desk. Our friends in Monroe gave us so many roses when we came away, they did not know what a precious gift it was. I filled a large bowl with them and I never saw a more beautiful boquet, or rather pyramid of flowers, we hung over them in extasy and came again and again to admire and enjoy. Our few rose bushes in the garden are blooming beautifully. Father had a trellis put up before the piazza the other day, and we have commenced to train the honeysuckle on it. The jessamine is not grown enough for that yet, it is putting out finely.
        Eldridge returned from Homer last night, brought a letter from Willie
and one from Miss Mat Newcombe. Willie says he hopes to be able to come home the last of this week, I hope he will, we shall be so glad to see him again, it seems like two months since he left instead of two weeks; he is in good spirits, dear fellow, sent home a new mare, says he hopes we will have peace in time for him to drive his greys this fall. I wish it might be, but I can hardly hope it.
        Miss Mat seemed not to have the slightest idea of any tinge of coldness in my letter to her, I am glad she had not, hers is as warm as the last, says she and her sister hope to come down soon. I was very much disappointed by not getting letter or even a message from Mrs. Morancy, I expect she is going to write by Willie.
Friday, April 29th.
        This long day is almost ended, I have been so weak and sick all day that I shall welcome the shades of evening, it is Eva's birthday, and in honour of her we have holiday. This morning immediately after breakfast we all took a little walk to gather flowers, got a quantity of the beautiful graceful blossoms of the "Old man's beard" tree and in coming home stopped at Dr. Young's and gathered our hands full of the honeysuckle that grows over the piazza. We have the parlour full of flowers, two small boquets and two large ones. I did not enjoy the walk much, when we reached the "Old man's beard" tree I felt too badly to stand up and the walk home was a painful effort. After arranging the flowers I took my seat in a large rocking chair with "Lamartine" but though I was very much interested in the pathetic story of "Jocelyn" I could not read, a dreadful weakness overpowered me and I felt exertion impossible, while even quiet was pain, how glad I was
that this was a holiday. I lay down on the sofa in the parlour and everything about the room was so quiet, the breath of the flowers so sweet as the gentle breeze bore their perfume to my couch that I could not but feel repose, and after several hours spent between waking and sleeping I took up my back again a little refreshed but very weary still.
        Mr. Barr came here on business about the iron that he is getting from the burned railroad bridge, stayed to dinner, is coming back to spend the night with us. I was very much indisposed to see anybody, but roused myself a little, feel better this evening, hope this dreadful lassitude will be over tomorrow. I have been expecting and hoping for Willie all the week. I wish so much he would come tonight, I expect him very confidently, there is no reason to prevent his coming they are doing nothing at Homer.
        Mother went up to Mrs. Brinton's Wednesday for her spinning wheels, did not return until yesterday, to dinner, we missed her very much indeed. She took Loring with her, they brought me a beautiful white Texas pink (wild pholx) the first I over saw, brought two roots of the "Traveller's Delight." I set them out but scarce dare to hope they will live after having lost so many vines. It has been very warm for several days past, summer is here in earnest now, we need rain very much indeed, if it would only rain everything would grow beautifully, I water my little garden every evening. My delicate little geranium has begun to grow quite fast, has lost all it's old leaves and has three green, healthy looking new ones, the two heliotropes are also doing very well. Our few rose bushes are blooming abundantly, I gather a large bunch of roses every morning.
        The good news from the army still comes in, we heard of a gallant exploit
of Price's today, the taking, killing or dispersing of three thousand Yankees, have no particulars yet. Forrest is still doing good service in Tennessee and Kentucky, our prospects are good at Richmond, all sides look bright after the great darkness which has so long hung over our beloved South.
        I have just come from witnessing the children's little party, they had a table set under the trees down at the foot of the gently sloping grove, and there the four sat, Eva, Loring, George and John, all as happy and contented as possible. Miss Mary and I sat and looked on, Eva is fourteen today, I often look at her and think how different she is from me at that age, she is a perfect child, with all the naieveté of ten years old, she has no idea of self control.
        Lately in my moments of bodily weakness the sad thought comes over me that I am losing my youth, it is more a hypochondriacal fancy than anything else I expect. I have never had any beauty, I have always known and sadly known that I was ugly, but I have lost my color, my eyes are often surrounded by a purple band of coloring, my hair used to be the only beautiful thing about me, and now it has fallen out till it is not more than half as thick as formerly. I can't walk fast or walk at all without being exhausted by it and these frequent seasons of unconquerable lassitude incline me to fretfulness. I fancy that my voice is getting shrill, it is not so strong as it used to me, I know. Oh what a terrible picture, it is only to relieve myself that I draw it, it may provoke a smile in some better day to read over these querolous complainings. No one would recognize these changes but myself, and therefore they must be in a great degree imaginary. I can't
bear to think on the want of energy I perceive in myself, I find it an effort to keep myself properly dressed. It in true I have not much to dress in, but I might look better than I do, must go and change my red calico for a thinner dress.
Saturday night, April 30th.
        The rain, the longed for rain has come at last, and how softly it falls upon the thirsty earth, how I wish it were day that I could watch it, it is delightful thus though, and I will not be so ungrateful as to wish for anything more, the smell of the rain comes up from the earth speaking its gratitude. All the evening the clouds have been gathering and since supper the rain has commenced, gentle at first but growing faster and faster, it sounds like one of these delightful slow and general rains, I hope it will last all night. I have such a beautiful bowl of flowers again, Father went to Monroe this morning and Mary sent me a boquet and a note saying that her Aunt was sick in bed and that she was quite uneasy about her, and this evening Miss Maggie Calderwood and Miss Laura Barnes brought me a large and beautiful boquet. I did not see them, Miss Mary and I had walked over to Mrs. Lidwell's to see Miss Anna Moore and they met Mother, as it was very late and they had come principally to see Mother on business, they did not come on. They brought a note from Mrs. Dortch requesting Mother to take her to board this summer, Mother refused of course, it would be too great a care entirely for Mother in these times and in her health.
        I have felt miserably again today, but hope I shall be better tomorrow, this rain is so delightful. There was a young lady here this evening who
is on her way to Missouri, their ambulance wheel broke and they stopped to have it mended, she was in New Orleans when it fell, has not seen her Mother for four years! her father has come for her and she is going home with him, had been staying in Shreveport, had met Mrs. McClay and Mrs. Walker there, said she thought that none of Gen. Walker's staff were killed in this last battle.
        Willie has not come yet, I have been hoping and looking for him all day.