Sunday night, April 16th.
        It has been a lovely Easter Sunday, and I have spent it happily, but am almost too weary now to write as I have felt today. The sun has shone brightly on the fresh green of the spring foliage, it was like a summer day and is now but little cooler than a summer evening. I was so rejoiced last week, so overjoyed at receiving two letters from my darling Valeria, I am rewarded after my weary waiting. I had almost grown tired of hoping for them, how often it is that we receive blessings when expectation has almost failed. These letters are so like my friend, her beautiful spirit breathes through them, it is somewhat like seeing her, only far less happy; how just a foundation has that friendship which time, absence, even silence can but strengthen, and how worthy is its object. She speaks of trials, of troubles, but with no shadow of discontent to dim her serene cheerfullness, her letters tell me of her unvarying affection, how invaluable it is to me. Oh, I can never be grateful enough that our correspondence has been renewed. I hope I am not presumptuous in saying Providentially renewed; I know I thank God for this blessing most gratefully. In the same mail with Valeria's I received a letter from Lois, we have wished so much to hear from Georgia, this letter is the first we have received and it is too short to satisfy us, hungry as we are for news. Grandma and Lois are still safe, the Yankees acted as we had imagined they would, the country is desolated in their track. What hurts me greatly is that Uncle Dole and Aunt Latire with their families have gone north, I understand from Lois' letter went with the Yankees; a great shame, but not unexpected, Uncle Dole's wife was just from there and Aunt Latire also; the ties of relationship are not strong enough to bear
such a shock, henceforth we shall be as strangers. Uncle David suffered from the Yankees, his mill was burned and mules taken, his negroes I suppose as a matter of course, he was himself taken prisoner but escaped; he had sent Aunt May and the children about six weeks previous, himself accompanying them as far as Memphis. Lois wrote no further particulars, I wish more than ever to hear directly from them. I cannot help feeling sorry that Aunt Mary has gone though it may be for the best and I know she and Uncle David are true to us. Lois says the Yankees behaved very badly in our old neighbourhood, our old friend Gen. Robison suffered much from them, but more from himself; he returned from Sandersville one evening in February quite intoxicated and according to accounts from his negroes fell off the piazza and broke his thigh. Lois said he suffered greatly and she feared he would not recover, we are all very sorry to hear this bad news. Lois writes of the sudden death of another of our old neighbours, honest Mr. McAfee, I had hoped to see him once more. I am too tired to write any more. Have been too busy for the last month to indulge in journalizing, it has been as much as I could do to write my letters, of which I have written a good number and quite lengthy ones.
Thursday, April 20th.
        I am depressed almost to despair, life seems to have lost its interest, earth it's beauty, of what use is courage under difficulties, hope in misfortune, when courage can no longer avail, hope no longer cheer. Day before Yesterday Father returned from Monroe with a countenance expressing the news
before he spoke. Richmond is evacuated, and it is reported, and universally believed, that Lee and Johnston have surrendered, and also Forrest, if this is true all is lost, lost, my God what a word, our country gone, I feel as if all were gone. I had never felt the possibility of this blow, all that makes life glorious; what virtue can be left to one that has no country, even resignation seem like treason to our principles; it is like darkness, it is so terrible. Have our brave soldiers fought for nothing, died for this! No, not for nothing, if it be indeed so, if this dreadful calamity fell upon us, yet have they not died for nothing. I cannot regret our course, better die protesting for our liberty than tamely submit; the bitterness is that we might have won, it was never before known that such a people perished and shall we perish, shall we indeed perish!
        I received a letter from Willie, poor boy he writes so gayly, his letter expresses such bouyancy, such confidence in and devotion to our "glorious Confederacy," I fear its glory has fallen. I think I ought to try to feel less bitterly, may God help me, this is a sore trial. My country has been my great love, my pride, my life. Yet even this is little to him, what are nations in his sight; is not it impious in me to rebel against his power, worse than foolish to set my opinions, my wishes, against his will? Am I indeed now regarding my wish to devote my life, my most cherished feelings to him, to have no other Gods to bow down to, no other idols? And these dear ones, I have a duty to them, I ought not selfishly to forget this, I must not dishonour my holy religion by failing here. Especially now ought I to excel in Faith, to be joyful in hope, instead of this terrible
despairing grief. Next Sunday Mr. Lawson is to be at Monroe again and I am to be baptized if no preventing occasion occurs, Mrs. Dortch is to be my Godmother.
        Thursday night--I am more composed now than when I wrote the above, was called away about some household affair as Mother was absent. The night finds me more able to say "Thy will be done," it seems that nothing more is left for us now, I am afraid to hope, yet it is impossible to banish hope entirely, and even if it were I am utterly unable to realize a calamity so great, and to me so unlooked for. However this may be, I feel that I must not now give myself up to these thoughts, in a few days I shall stand at God's altar, it befits me to think of this, to prepare myself as much as possible for this.
Wednesday, April 26th.
        Monday evening Father and I rode to Trenton, and were met by Capt. Reynolds, who told us the astounding news, Lincoln and Seward are killed, the first in the theatre, the other in his bedchamber! It is an event so little like modern times that it could not be believed, but on the most satisfactory evidence, it electrified us, it must electrify the world, it is the first note of new drama, what will follow? Heaven only knows, it is utterly impossible for me to imagine, it must have a powerful effect. I hope that the words of the actor Booth may find an echo in every southron's hearts, while he clasps afresh his weapon let him cry "Sic semper tyrannis," Virginia's glorious motto, let it be our watchword. Oh, that it might be! This news awaked us from the stupor following on that of Lee's surrender.
        Jimmy Stone came very unexpectedly and spent Saturday night with us,
he brought a full confirmation of the dreadful news, he had just returned from a trip to the river, and while there he had received Yankee papers containing the entire correspondence between Lee and Grant, terms of surrender and everything; he had heard the salute at Vicksburg, two hundred guns! It seems that no evidence could be stronger than this, yet Mr. Brinton was here this morning and says he does not believe it, for he saw a soldier, an extremely well informed one from the other side of the river who says it was Fitzhugh Lee, not the General in Chief. I hope it may be so, yet I can hardly hope, it seems that even Yankee mendacity could not extend so far. Father has gone to Millhaven, will be back this evening and may bring some more news. Father like a steadfast man as he is, is not bowed down though deeply grieved by the news. Mr. Gordon was out Saturday, spent the night with us, very much depressed, the water floating his cotton away, he came up to get lumber for boats. The waters are very high, there is not often such an overflow. Mr. Gordon brought me several letters, one from Willie, two long and deeply interesting ones from Valeria; I have commenced answering them but it takes a long time to answer such letters. One of them was three months on the way! Where can it have been?
        The weather has been cool enough for fire night and morning, fortunately no frost. I received a note from Miss Eliza Baker Saturday evening, saying that Mr. Lawson would not be down until next Sunday, so we did not go in.
        Jimmy Stone left Sunday morning for camp again, says his regiment will fight to the last, he looks very well indeed. Willie was well, wrote in good spirits; poor fellow, his letters make me feel pitiful, coming as the last two have after this sad news. Oh, that it might be false.