Friday, Dec. 4th.
        I took my first ride on Mollie Tuesday evening, Father and I rode down to the mill, through the woods, in other times our favourite and almost daily ride, we had a very pleasant one on Tuesday, Mollie did not go lame at all, she actually bounded beneath me in her old wild, free way. I enjoyed my ride very much, it had been nearly two years since Father and I rode together. I was busy Wednesday evening in the garden with Uncle Jim setting out roses and other things; I set a cutting of a climbing rose which Willie brought me from Arcadia before my window, and a honeysuckle and "Lady Banks" in front of the house. We put stakes around them and I think they will grow. I was very intently superintending the planting of my roses when Dr. McDonough came up, he took me quite by surprise but I was very glad to see him, as I always am for I have come to like him very much. He sat some time. Miss Mary made the remainder of some gelatine that he sent over Sunday, he said the poor soldier to whom it was given relished
it exceedingly and was getting better, he said he would tell him that a young lady made it with her own hands, that they seemed so gratified at the idea of a lady doing anything for them. Mrs. McGuire came out yesterday with Miss Mary, she is going to stay several days. The weather has moderated very much, is now quite warm, I think it will rain soon. I finished Eva's hat Monday, it is a very good shape, in spite of my trouble about it; Eva was at Mrs. Roane's yesterday and says she admired it very much.
Thursday, Dec. 10th. / '63.
        Sunday night there was a soldier here from Bragg's army, he was on foot and we took him in, though the house was full; he brought a newspaper which contained news of the late battle between Bragg and Rosencranz, it appears that Bragg was defeated, but I am in hopes from the tenour of the despatches that he may recover his position. The dispatch said that the Washington and Cobb artillery had been taken with all their guns. I do not know whether John and Angus and Green Raoul were in that division, but oh I hope not; I have been thinking of them and their sister all the week, it has seemed as if I were walking among memories of the dead and absent, and a grief like that of first bereavement has been with me. Oh if I only knew where Valeria was, I might write to her and that would be some relief from the grief of her absence. I wonder if she has any idea of how constantly she is in my thoughts, ever lovingly and with a great desire.
        Mrs. McGuire went away yesterday, she had improved from her visit. I have been busy as usual during the week, reading and teaching, yesterday
Loring went out to where they were gathering corn, and as Eva and Miss Mary were away, and Georgie sick with a chill, I could have no school. I sewed awhile on Father's glove and after finishing it took up Cosmos, but after reading a little I found I had such a headache, and felt so sick that I was obliged to lie down. I slept until dinner and awoke much better.
        Last night we recommenced our readings which had been interrupted during Mrs. McGuire's visit, we have nearly finished Little Dorritt.
        Eva had a chill Sunday, but took quinine and did not have another. Georgia has had two this week, I hope he will not have another, he has grown yellow already. Mr. Seale came back today, he brought some flour and some skins for Father, he had been gone a month. He brought me a letter from Mrs. Morancy, a letter so affectionate and so like herself that it was extremely grateful to me. It is in answer to one I sent her by Mr. Barclay the other day; he called here a few moments, was looking remarkably well, he is very gentlemanly in appearance, with a face very attractive to me, and one which is unlike any I ever saw before. The weather has been disagreeable for several days, dark and cold. Willie is at home this evening, has just returned. I suppose his arrangements for his substitute are quite finished now, I never speak of it, and cannot think of it without pain, which is so much the worse that it has none of the softness of sadness, but rather a little mingling of self reproach that I should ever seem to lack affection for a brother who has always been to me the kindest and dearest that a brother can be.
Monday, Dec. 21st. 1863.
        I have just read the closing sentences of Lamartine's "Voyage en Orient"
and closed the book with a feeling like that of parting from some old friend, how beautiful that book is, and how much pleasure has given to me, To me it has been a glimpse into new and unknown world, full of romantic life and beauty; it is not a description of travels that I have read, I seem to have lived with the traveller, sharing his thoughts, his emotions and his beautiful and grand pictures.
        I had a letter from Miss Kate Stone Saturday, it contains the sad news of her brother's death from a hurt received by his horse, this is the second brother she has lost in the army, there is now but one remaining, and he is just recovering from severe wounds; how much sorrow everywhere. How different our feelings now from those this season brings in time of peace. A shadow of evil to come hangs over us, Father's face is sad and anxious, he has heard something lately that leads him to fear that the Yankees will make Monroe a permanent post; he looks forward to losing all his property, and perhaps a worse fate. I should be willing to endure poverty, willing to labour for my bread all the rest of my life if I could see my country in peace, see the South take her place among nations and be able to say with grateful pride, I am a southerner, this is the end I hope and pray for and I believe it will come, though now our sky looks so dark; our foes within, our inefficient and false officers, and the lukewarmness of the people are what we have contend with, these are foes far more powerful than the Yankees, and when I think of the corruption in our midst and see no genius powerful enough to crush it, I fear that we shall gain our liberty only after years of war and perhaps anarchy.
        There is to be a ball in Monroe Christmas eve, I have received an invitation and yesterday Mrs. McGuire sent to urge me to go with her, but I am
far from wishing to participate in such gaiety. I shall go to Mrs. DeLary's concert because Miss Mary is to play and sing, otherwise I should not think of it. It is to be on next Monday night. I am not very well the last few days, am nervous and weak, I have been having some teeth filled, and my ill feelings are perhaps owing partly to that.
        Mrs. Brantley and Miss Randall, a relative of hers, spent the night with us Thursday. The weather has been very cold for several days, but is warmer now, the ground did not thaw for three days; we had some ice cream Sunday, frozen with ice from the little stream in the grove.
Wednesday, Dec. 30th. 1863.
        Christmas has come, and the holidays are almost gone before I have written a word about it. The day before Christmas was busy cooking all day, and this made us feel a little like Christmas was coming. Father and Miss Mary went into town that day and brought out some candy and pecans with which we filled the children's stockings, they woke up before day in the morning and were highly delighted, John was full of surprise, for he cannot remember last Christmas, and if he could, we had no "Santa Claus" then; we had our stockings hung up and candy in them, and Miss Mary scratched the chimney bask in imitation of Santa Claus' carriage wheel tracks, Georgie came in our room in the morning and related with a wondering air how he could see the marks of Santa Claus feet on Mother's room chimney, we then showed him ours and he was strengthened in his belief, After they were dressed, the children ran out to distribute candy among the little negroes and before breakfast all had disappeared. When our late breakfast was over,
we made egg nogg for the negroes, who gathered round the back door highly delighted, there were many of them, for most of the railroad negroes were here. When they had all had a glass round, Mother filled her great punch bowl again for the "white folks," and we sent for Dr. McDonough to come and take a glass, he was obliged to go back again though, to attend to his sick. Dr. Compton had gone in to a ball given on Christmas eve by the D. D. Dy, a company of young ladles in town, he had insisted on Dr. McDonough's taking Christmas day as a holiday, but instead of coming out to take his place, as he had promised, he left Dr. McDonough all alone, did not come out until the day after Christmas. Dr. McDonough came over again about two to dinner, but after sitting an hour or more was obliged to return to see a sick man, and did not get back until dinner had come on, and then he had to leave soon after, so that I am afraid our invitation, which was meant to give him pleasure, was more of an inconvenience.
        We had singing and playing for an hour or more in the evening, and then closed the day with a few pages from Homer's Iliad. Mr. Haddrick, one of our couriers, came down to hear the music, and seemed somewhat cheered, he looked low spirited before, thinking about home I suppose; he is a very young man, quite modest and well mannered, at first he was very shy but is getting a little acquainted now, he never saw a piano before he came here, and ours is quite a curiosity to him.
        Altogether, our Christmas day was better than the last, principally because Father was here, but yet it was by no means merry, as it could not be now when our prospects are so uncertain and gloomy. The next two days passed quietly enough, Monday we went in to the concert at Mrs. DeLary's. General Mouton's command, from lower Louisiana, has just arrived, and part of it was crossing at Trenton, so we were obliged to drive down to the Monroe
Ferry. This is dreadfully conducted, they take almost an hour to make a trip and the landing is so bad that to get out they have to "jump the wagons," this is simply making the mules spring out of the flat a few paces from the beach, and bring the wagon down after them, rather a perilous thing. The Lieutenant on guard at the Ferry was a Texan, he was very kind and polite to us and let us go over as soon as possible, but now comes the catastrophe; they had fixed the landing as well as they could but it was still dreadful. Here all came out of the carriage but Mother and Uncle Jim started to drive on, the mules gave a spring into the flat, and before we could speak, the fore wheels had come against it with a dreadful jar and, the springs breaking, the carriage came crashing down. The mules were so gentle they did not stir, and Mother got out safely, but both the front springs were snapped and the axle sprung; we were thankful Mother was not hurt for it was indeed a narrow escape. Everybody said they knew it would be so, except our kind Texan, who said he thought it was dangerous.
        Willie had accompanied us on horseback, but he was obliged to turn and drive the mules home. I don't know how we should have done but for our kind Lieutenant who went over in the flat with us and assisted us out, indeed all the soldiers were very good and seemed sorry instead of glad at our accident. We laboured up the hill completely loaded with packages. Rose had her blankets and a carpet bag to carry, I had a shawl and bundle and Mother a box, we parted from Miss May at the top of the hill, for she was going to Mrs. McGuire's. The street was crowded with soldiers and our walk was anything but agreeable. We got to Mrs. Stevens just in time to make ourselves presentable for the concert; and then we were rather late and our
seats were in the furthest corner of the room, it happened very pleasantly though for us, for we were seated by a window, & in the alcove between it and the fireplace there was quite a group of gentlemen, one opened a conversation with Mrs. Kenison and Mary, in that incidental manner which so often happens, there was another one with him, a Georgian, and we found some mutual acquaintances so that we soon became quite social, when we had been there some time, Lieutenant Flournoy came through the window behind us and got a seat between me and my next neighbour against the wall. I was very much surprised to see him, and rather pleasantly so, for I have a sort of liking for him though rather of a negative kind. Then Mrs. Kenison's brother-in-law, a good looking young Creole, found his way through the window to our corner, and so in spite of the dull music, we managed to pass a tolerable evening, if I had had no one else but Lieut. Flournoy I might have been rocked to sleep by his gallant nonsense, a repetition of how he missed ladies' society and how much he enjoyed it, and a lot of other things not more exciting, but the gentlemen behind were very pleasant. Lieut. Flournoy introduced them, the first as Lieut. Barrett, and the Georgian as Capt. Somebody, I could not catch the name. If it had not been for the carriage being broken I should have passed quite a pleasant evening. The charades were quite interesting, and Miss Mary was complimented in our corner several times. Mrs. Stevens and May both pressed me to stay until after New Years there, and I should have liked it, but wanted to come home to see the negro's frolic last night. Father had the partition in our long shanty taken down and they danced there, as they did last year, they commenced dancing about nine o'clock. Dr. McDonough came over in the evening and
after we had given him some music we all went out to see the dancing. About eleven we grew tired and came away, but when we woke up this morning the fiddle was still going but the ranks of the dancers were considerably thinned. Rose made her debut last night, she was dressed out in a flounced white skirt, a pink tarlton body with a gold breast pin and a wreath of white roses, she danced every set I believe until morning. Annie was dressed in a low necked white muslin and she looked better than Rose, I think. I haven't done anything today, of course we had breakfast late, and then Dr. McDonough came over, and a Lady, wife of a sick man at the hospital slept here last night, and her brother-in-law came over for her and wanted to hear some music and then I had some little things to put in order, so that it was quite late before I sat down to my journal, and I have had so many interruptions. A Capt. Fouet came here to see Father on business this morning and sat until dinner and he asked for some music and Father sent for me so I was beguiled into the parlour before I knew he was there and could not get out again till dinner time and now it is so late that I am afraid I cannot write to Mrs. Morancy as I intended, it is a pleasant evening to write, a real rainy evening.
Thursday, Dec. 31st. 1863.
        The last night of the old year, today has been dark, cold and snowy, and the wind has blown and whistled all day long, but it is stilled now, and the quiet stars shine brightly in the cloudless sky; tomorrow's sun will rise upon a new year. And in this year if it please God to help me,
I will try to do better, I will set to work earnestly and perseveringly to cure the great faults which I know I have and to find out those that are now hidden. What is in store for us in the coming year we cannot tell, but from all we see now it will doubtless be fraught with sorrow and trial, the next new years eve we may be homeless, but whatever happens I want to have a firm faith in God, in my Redeemer, then all else will be easier to bear. Goodbye then, Old Year, I will not complain at the lot thou hast brought to me, for though I sorrow indeed that I have not better improved them, the cares, the disappointments thou hast brought have been good for me, it saddens me to think how little real progress I have made, and I feel anxious for my resolutions for the future, it is so hard to be persevering in my efforts, in moments of humiliation and enthusiasm I feel able to do and bear many things, but the little, daily trials of temper which come to everyone find me wanting, and here as everywhere I find the demon of selfishness starting up against my better and holier nature. Oh how often does my weakness allow it to triumph, how often I forget or neglect my only refuge.