Oakland, August 3rd 1862--
        This is one of the saddest pages in my journal, I have not written here for more than a week, I have not had the heart. Grandma is dead, she was taken sick just two weeks ago today and died last Sunday (the 27th). We all followed her to the grave on Monday, she is buried almost in sight of the house, on our land, Oh! what a week this has been, it seemed as if it would never end. I sat up with Grandma the last night, she was unconscious for two days, except at short intervals, the last word she said was "Satira", I was leaning over her and I think she
took me for Aunt Satira.
        Every thing reminds me of her, especially in my room, I could scarcely bear to enter it and am just beginning to overcome the feeling a little; she died in the hall, the hall where she was so fond of sitting we scarcely ever sit there now. It seems months since she was here, though it is not a week since her body lay cold and quiet in that very hall, where we all walked on tiptoe and spoke in whispers, as if death could be disturbed; my mind has been so weak, so very weak, and I have felt so sad, my body too has been sick and today I feel scarcely able to sit up. George is the only well one.
Sunday, Aug. 10th/62.
        We are all getting better now, but many of us are far from well, Georgie has been complaining for several days. I took medicine and lay in bed Tuesday and was hardly able to sit up for several days after, I feel much better now. John is not at all well, and is very fretful.
        Father left home Tuesday to be gone two weeks, but returned very unexpectedly last night, he went to Vicksburg and to Jackson, he looks much better than when he went.
        Mr. Green has been in two battles lately, came out of both uninjured, Father saw it in the papers, I am so glad to hear it, but they are constantly skirmishing in Virginia and he may not be living now, a number of young men from Monroe were killed in the late Richmond battle. We hear of deaths et either from disease or the sword nearly every day; Mrs. Phillips and her daughter Mrs. Byrne spent the day here Friday. Mrs. Phillip's brother was among the slain at Richmond. These things make me feel sad, sometimes my spirits fall dreadfully, but I try to battle against the ideas that creep unawares into my mind and I endeavour to free myself from the melancholy that takes hold upon me.
 Mother and I called upon Mrs. Filhiol yesterday, she is a very pleasant lady, she reminds me so much of Aunt Lydia, her manners are so like Aunt Lydia's, pleasant and easy; Mr. Filhiol too is a very agreeable gentleman, reminds me irresistably of Mr. Green, every motion every tone is so much like his.
        Miss Scarborough came over to Mrs. Wilson's last week, she and Miss Julia were here Friday.
        The weather is warm yet, and dry, but not very dry. I received letters from Lois and Aunt Mary a week or two ago, Grandma Holton is at Uncle David's she has been very sick but the country air was improving her. Lois is at Mr. Holgandorf's still, says she is in excellent health.
Wednesday, Aug. 20th--
        The Yankees have come back, a few days ago they came down the river, took a cargo of arms which was lying at the landing, marched over to Tallulah, burned the railroad warehouse and some cars and then marched back to their gunboats again; we had a guard of several hundred men at the river, but they had no head to direct them and ran "like sheep". Some soldiers have now gone down to the swamp. Father intended to go to Mobile this week but of course he cannot go now. I am sorry, for I think a journey would do him good, he went into Monroe Monday, heard the news, was busy preparing a train to transport the soldiers until eight or nine o'clock, reached Tallulah at twelve; was busy there for some time and did not reach Monroe again until daybreak, he was busy there all day yesterday, returned home about dark and went to bed without any supper. He is thin, weak, and lowspirited. Oh! what would I give to see him well again!
  A soldier came here to breakfast this morning, after he had finished and was sitting at the table, Mother told him not to wait if he was in a hurry; "no", he said, "I am going to take my time going back, I had to run all the way down to Monroe, yesterday".
        General Blanchard sent out an indefinite order to the camps, and all the men that were able, went off, the consequence was there were too many and some had to march back immediately. Capt. Sam. Adams is at home on furlough.
        Monday morning Mother and I were sitting sewing when we were surprised by his entrance, accompanied by a Mr. Golding; we had not expected the honor of a visit from him; as it was, he came to see about buying a negro. He is much improved since he went, not near so conceited, apparently, and more polished in his manners; there is a familiarity about him, however, which repels me; I may be too romantic in my ideas, but I like to see a gentleman's manner towards a lady respectful even to reverence.
        We have a vacation now, we have no school since Grandma's death. I have been busy, since I have been well enough to do anything, making out a list of British poets and writing down the most important events of their lives, this keeps me contented. for I believe that I am learning something in doing it, I want constant occupation.
        It is now nearly four months since I heard a word from my dear Miss Valeria, though I have written several letters to her, sometimes I long to see her with a longing that cannot be described. Now when I am in my room, every where I turn I see something to remind me of my departed Grandmother. I stay here no more than I can help; I have visited her grave only once though I feel I ought to go there; the sorrow in
my heart seems hard and cold.
        We have had no rain yet; Willie says if we do not have rain soon all the crops will be ruined; the dust in the road is perfectly suffocating. Mrs. Richardson and sister were over here Monday, they are very pleasant ladies. I think I like Mrs. Scarborough best.
Sunday, Aug. 31st
        The last day of the month and also of our vacation, tomorrow we commence school again, I have not accomplished half the work which I allotted to this vacation. Alas! I could not forsee the future, I did not expect the sorrowful event of last month, which has rendered our vacation a month of mourning instead of joy, and of sickness, and lassitude, instead of health and hard work. The only useful things I have done are the commencement of my poetical list and the making of some soldiers shirts.
        I received a letter from Miss Ginnie Calwell last night, it brought sad news to me, the Ridgills have left Amite, that was in June, three months ago, and I have not heard from Miss Valeria yet. I don't know what can have happened, if I could only hear from her, she is one of my few loved, they are few whom I love, but oh! how my heart clings to them.
        I ought to feel thankful this evening, and I indeed I do feel so, though I cannot but be a little sad; we have had quite a little shower this evening, hardly enough to lay the dust but there is prospect of more, it has been so dry everything is burning up, even this little shower refreshes us, though it has now nearly all dried into the parched earth.
        Father returned from Jackson, Miss. last night, he crossed the
river at Vicksburg, no gunboats were in sight then, though two have come down since, very few of the people had moved back to Vicksburg but those have remained there.
        Father came from Jackson to Vicksburg with Dr. Lord and Bishop Green, the Bishop had not received a letter from his nephew, neither had any one else that Father saw, though Mr. Smedes had heard of him through his son, who is a lieutenant in Capt. Green's company, he says that Capt. Green behaved with great gallantry, their regiment was in that desperate charge in which so many brave men were fruitlessly sacrificed; they were commanded to lie down to shield themselves from the deadly fire, and kept that position an hour, when finally, they were allowed to retire, Capt. Green found himself alone with two of his lieutenants and four men, the rest were killed wounded, and missing, of course many came back again after the fight was over.
        Puss Bry spent the day with us yesterday, Capt. Sam. Adams has been very sick, is better now, Mr. Dillard has also been very low, his situation is now precarious. All our family are quite well now. We have commenced reading aloud again, last we begun "Anne of Guirstein", we enjoy it very much, Willie is exceedingly interested in it. We shall have little time for reading when school commences again.