March 2nd/1862--Sunday--
        As yet we have heard of nothing but reverses, Fort Donnelson was taken by the 17th last month, since that Nashville has been surrendered by the civil authorities, and now Columbus is threatened by an army of 100,000 men, rumours are all around, we know nothing certainly except that the Yankees are advancing and our troops retiring, it is hinted that only enticing the enemy forward, I hope it is so. I cannot be sure of anything except that I would rather die than see our armies humiliated by flight, our country ruined by submission; submission! why do I speak that disgraceful word, why do I think it for a moment; victory,
or death is our only alternative, worse than death would be our conquest by the Yankees, that is now the most hateful word in our language. Father has been in New Orleans all the week we expect him back tonight.
        Friday was a fast day, the first act after President Davis' inauguration as President of the permanent government was to appoint a day of fast and prayer, it was kept very strictly in Monroe, all the stores and other places of business was closed, and the Church was crowded, we fasted here, had no dinner at all, no meat for breakfast, school was also suspended. Mother and Grandma went into Monroe to attend Church, Grandma remained with Aunt Jane.
        We received Mr. John Green's wedding card today, his bride was Miss Skipwith of Mississippi.
        We have been having delightful weather for the past week, yesterday, the first day of Spring, was bright and warm. I walked down to the bayou and gather some sassafras and haw flowers, the little violets are beginning to peep out in all directions, peach buds are about to burst, and nature all around prepares to burst her fetters.
        This morning we were waked up by a severe hailstorm, it was of slight duration, and was succeeded by rain, it cleared off before dinner, and now the wind, whistling round the corners, the fires upon the hearths and the sounds of the axe at the would pile do not seem much like Spring. Vegetation not far enough advanced for this cold weather to do more than retard its progress. Among all the sad news we hear lately there is one thing which has not yet suffered reverse, this is the wonderful little Sumter, the exploits of the gallant Captain Semnes still call forth our admiration. Lincoln's large, staunch war vessels cannot succeed in capturing the leaky little craft or prevent her destroying their laden
schooners, first in one hemisphere then in the other, she carries her bright flag unsullied.
--Sunday evening March 16/1862--
        We still hear bad news, or at least we have heard of no decisive victory, there in a report that Gen'l. Price has defeated the Yankees in Arkansas, but everything about it is vague; one thing we are sure of, our battering ram, the Virginia sunk one of the blockading ships on the Potomac last week, and badly disabled two more, rumours of an approaching battle on the Potomac reach us, Virginia is under martial law, also Memphis and New Orleans; the whole country is excited, and every body astir, Two companies are forming here, to leave in the course of two weeks, Mr. Pierce has joined one of them, a cavalry company, he will go if he can get a horse.
        John and Angus Ridgill leave for the war this month, perhaps have left already; John wrote to ask Willie to join them, Willie's health was much better and he concluded to go, and wrote John word that he would, Father was away at that time, but has returned, he thinks of getting an appointment from Government, if he does he says Willie must stay at home, if he does not, he will wish Willie to go. I don't know what to wish, I can't bear the thought of Willie's going away, and yet I am anxious for him to serve his country. I feel sad all the time, my only comfort is in my bible, where we are told that if we continue patient we shall at last be victorious.
        When I think what a glorious cause we have or how much less we have suffered than other nations who were still victorious, I feel strengthened, but sometimes we cannot think of all this.
        Father left us last Sunday intending to go to New Orleans and
Richmond before he returned, but last night he came back very unexpectedly, he said that the heavy rain we had last week washed some of the eastern railroads so that he could not go on, so he thought he would spend Sunday with us, he leaves tomorrow again; he may perhaps be appointed by government to build forty miles of railroad as a connecting link between Selma and the Southern road; if he does he will be away from home all the year.
        We received a letter from Captain Marks last week telling us what he wished for the company's summer clothing, Mother is trying to get the cloth, we shall soon be very busy. We keep on studying steadily; I do not learn as fast as I wish, but I am too impatient; I do as well as I can expect, the weeks pass away so quickly it seems to me I do so little.
Sunday night. March 23rd/1862.--
        We are sitting up tonight, thinking that perhaps Father may come, and as I am not sleepy I take the opportunity of writing a little.
        When Father left, he expected to be gone three or four weeks, but was detained at DeSoto by the high water, the river has been rising for some time, and now threatens to overflow. Father wrote to Mother Friday saying that if he could arrange his business so he would come home and spend Sunday with us, he wrote again yesterday saying he could not leave as the water was over the track in some places, and we must not expect him till he wrote again, but Mother thought perhaps he might come tonight.
        We have a very cold windy week, Wednesday night we had a perfect storm of wind and rain, many trees were torn up, and blown down, since that, we have an almost constant cold wind. Grandma spent the week in Monroe; came home today.
  Willie had three chills this week, but he is taking Cholagoque again and will have no more I hope.
        We have not yet heard any news of importance from the war. Mr. Pierce was here this morning, the company which he joined has broken up, he has not decided yet whether to join the other company which, is made up, or go and join the Blues.
Sunday, March 30th/62.
        Father returned Wednesday night, but left again this evening, he has just gone. This time I hope he will not be delayed, for I hate to have his absence in anticipation; the river is now at a stand, I hope it will soon fall.
        Major Bry and Miss Hannah spent the day with us, there is no news of importance from the war. Mr. Pierce is here this evening.
        We have had delightful weather for the past week, everything looks lively and beautiful, nearly all the trees are dressed in tiny young leaves and the dogwood begins to look quite white, though the flowers are none of them fully matured.
        Willie has not had a chill since Saturday, if he will only continue his cholagoque he will fully recover.
        Angus and John Ridgill have gone to the war.--