Monday, October 7th/ 1861--
        I have waited until the seventh day of the month has almost past to write in my journal. The past week has been a busy one to me. Almost every day I went visiting. Tuesday Mrs. Cauthorn and Miss Puss Bry spent the day with us, Wednesday our society met, and I spent the morning at the Church, Thursday I spent at Major Bry's. Friday I went up to the meeting of the Summerfield society, I went on horseback with Capt. Marks and Miss Phoebe Friend, and enjoyed myself very much, Saturday I went to walk with the Misses Bry, started right after dinner and did not get home until nearly dark; besides all this I have scalloped two flannel skirts, knit half a sock for John and written one whole morning, and I have been labouring under a severe cold nearly all the time.
        This morning I have been very busy compiling society reports, a work of considerable labour since all the donations with their donors must be put down, and to omit a single pair of socks is a great negligence. I went over my minutes five or six times to see that nothing had been left out and then compared tables and amounts until I was heartily tired; but it is all done now, and I can feel a little better contented, this reason of all this trouble is that our society has separated from the one at Monroe, and I wished to make out a report of every thing we had done.
  Father has been improving slowly since I wrote last, he is still weak, he went to Vicksburg Wednesday and was very much fatigued when he returned home, he and Mother have gone to Monroe today.
        Mrs. Batchelor has taken the Academy in Monroe, so that hope is past; we have written to two other teachers.
        A great calamity befel Uncle Moses the other day, on last Wednesday the temporary scaffolding around his bridge fell down and killed one of his workmen, besides wounding one or two.
        The weather is quite cool now, we had some very warm days last week, but it rained last night and is momentarily getting colder.
        We go on another great chinquapen hunt tomorrow.
Saturday, Oct. 12th--
        We took our chinquapen hunt as we contemplated, had a very pleasant time. Father went with us and Charley went to shake the trees, we walked there and back again and gathered chinquapens all day, we were very tired when we got home. Carrie Young did not go, she could not have walked, Mrs. Marks, Misses Puss and Hannah Bry and Florence stayed to supper with us. While we were talking after supper Mrs. Bry sent up word to Miss Puss to ask of she was coming home that night, Mrs. Bry had been very uneasy about them, and thought they were lost in the woods.
        The Brys moved to Monroe yesterday, we were sorry to lose their company--are going to move down to their house Monday.
        Mother was threatened with a raised breast day before yesterday, she took a violent cold, and increased it by going to the society, she is up today, Miss Mary had a chill Wednesday, another Thursday and another yesterday, she missed it today and has been up all the afternoon.
        Miss Newcomb and her sister Miss Bennett spent the day with us Wednesday, I was very glad to see them, Miss Bennett is pleasant, but I
do not like her so well as Miss Newcomb.
        The weather is very pleasant now, cool and clear, this morning it was very cold, but it is warmer now.
Lynhurst, Oct. 16th/61--
        We have moved; our fifth move since leaving Georgia has been completed we shall have to make one more, and I hope that will prove the last. We commenced moving Monday, and all slept here last night. I came down early yesterday morning and remained all day, putting things in order as they were brought down, it was a dull, leaden day, and about dusk it commenced to rain, there had been no time to bring a load of wood, and when the night came on, cold and damp we had only a few sticks to make a blaze in the chimney, still the neat blue carpet on the floor, the white beds, mahogany stand and rocking chairs drawn close to the fire-place made a homelike picture as seen by the mild light of the Kerosene lamp. I was tired and Mother was nearly sick with the colic, we had to sit for Father and Miss Mary who had gone to Vicksburg. The heavy rain pouring down on the roof was no pleasant reminder of their cold ride home, and although I read aloud from the fascinating Conquest of Peru the hours wore away heavily till the rumbling of the carriage wheels announced their coming. They were both wet, having crossed the ferry in the rain, and our little fire was not a sufficiency for them, however, we soon went to bed, and I at least, forgot my cares (?) in sound refreshing sleep.
        When I rose this morning my limbs were very stiff but this soon wore off. I have spent a very quiet day, unpacking and arranging my writing materials, looking over my papers to select a piece for Miss Puss Bry's Album, writing letters, and writing my journal; besides
putting away clothes, and sundry other little things.
        Father is President and Superintendant of the railroad, I suppose it was necessary he should be, but if it could have been avoided it would have been a great pleasure to me, now he will have to be away from home a great deal. I am sorry too on Dr. Young's account, it deprives him of his situation.
        I went to Church Sunday at Chapel Hill.
Saturday Oct. 19th/61--
        When I wrote last I forgot to say that we have had quite a naval victory on the Mississippi; last Saturday commodore Hollins made an attack on the Blocading vessels with six boats, having in all only sixteen guns and three hundred men, he had an old steamboat all encased in iron, as a sort of battering ram, this boat was called the Mannassas, it ran into one of the largest ships and sank it, the rest of the blockading fleet were very much frightened, several vessels got aground; our boats took one Schooner loaded with coal; more vessels would probably have been sunk, but for a disarrangement in the machinery of the "Manassas" caused by the violence of the shock. We rejoice greatly over this victory, it seems as it the United States must soon see the folly of their present course and grant us peace.
        Father, Mother and I went into Monroe Thursday, Georgie went with us, he had his hair cut off, I could not bear the idea of having it cut, but he did look very cunning after it was done, he looks so much like Willie now, he is delighted with the idea of having his hair cut like Father's thinks himself entirely above wearing frocks any longer.
        We went to the sewing society, to Mrs. Roane's Mrs. Bry's and to Mrs. Steven's to dine. While we were waiting on the steps of the society
room for the carriage to come from the barber shop, Mrs. Calderwood and Miss Hanna being the only ladies left there, Mrs. Calderwood asked Mother to go over to her house and wait there for the carriage, she urged her invitation and we accordingly went over. She regaled us with pears, apples, and Pecans and when Father came for us, bade us goodbye with many courteous invitations on each side.
        We found Major Bry's family very well, all were at home except Miss Hannah, who was at Cottonport with Mrs. Cauthorn.
        Aunt June was quite well. I think Miss Mary Stevens, Mrs. Steven's neice, a very pleasant young lady I hope to form her acquaintance upon a more extended scale.
        On our way home, we stopped at Mrs. Maguire's she is Judge Lemie's sister, a very pleasant lady, has been living at her present residence forty years! this of itself is enough to render her interesting in this country where almost every one has recently moved here.
        We have had very disagreeable weather, it commenced raining Thursday night, and has been either raining or misting ever since. The sun came out this afternoon, and it seems to have settled into cold weather.
        Father has come from Monroe.