Friday, September 6th/ 1861--
        Since I wrote last Miss Mary has entirely recovered from her attack. Willie had another chill Wednesday night and a fever last night, he is up today, but looks rather like an invalid. Our society
met yesterday, we gave out a good many shirts to make and also a basket of yarn, every body seems desirous to do their part of the soldier's work. Mrs. Cauthorn and Mrs. Dillard came home to dinner with us.
        Monday, Mrs. Noble, Mother and I went up to the meeting of the society at Zion Hill six miles from here, but they had changed the day of meeting and we went up to Mrs. Bennett's house, we had never seen her before, but her daughter, Miss Newcomb, is the secretary of the society, and Mrs. Noble had been invited there, they received us very cordially; Mrs. Bennett is from the vicinity of Milledgeville, she and Mother had many acquaintances in common. The Bennetts have been here twelve years.
        Miss Newcomb is a very nice young lady, she showed me her scrap book, herbarium, and many other little treasures. Mother spent the day with Mrs. Bry Tuesday. Wednesday she and Mrs. Cauthorn went into Monroe.
        Father left for Vicksburg yesterday; we expect him back tonight. Yesterday evening Carrie Young invited me to go to ride with her we went in her buggy.
        We have had warm weather lately, it has not rained this week.
Sunday, Sep. 15th/1861--
        I cannot help feeling sad this evening, Oh when we think what may be before us, how can any of us be aught but sad. Father, Mother and Major Bry have just walked over to Dr. Young's who returned from Virginia Thursday night.
        Dr. Young is in high spirits and expects that we will be victorious and that soon; but oh if we are, how many many bleeding hearts will that victory cost! I sicken at the thought.
        Father and Major Bry think that the war will continue through
Lincoln's administration, but I pray that God in his mercy may avert this trial, I have never contemplated a long war, I have steeled myself to bear great and bloody battles and, many privations and even suffering for a little while, but four long years of war, of suspense which is worse than defeat almost; my heart sinks, my courage utterly fails; can I bear it? but why speak thus, I know I must bear it, and it only rests with me to decide whether I shall bear cheerfully or repiningly. I hope I may be enabled to be cheerful, and I sometimes think I can be so, but there are moments of darkness, in which I cannot think of the brightness which is often hid by clouds, and waits but for the stormy wind to scatter them and make its glory apparent. Oh, that I might have grace given me to wait on the Lord's good pleasure, I am too impatient, and I sometimes fear that God has wholly withdrawn his countenance from me, else I should not so rebel against his chastisements.
        I think too much of my sorrows and too little of my blessings, truly God has been very kind to me, and though he has sent trials to me, yet how do I know but that if it had not been for them I should never have tested the sweetness of God's mercy.
        Father has been sick since I wrote last, he was caught in the rain last Friday night, and took a chill, he was quite sick, but was able to leave for Vicksburg on Thursday, he returned last night. Father was unfortunate on his journey home at one of the stations he met with a very bad man, who opened a conversation with him about some cattle which had been killed on the road, and for which Father had refused to pay an exorbitant price, after speaking a few words Father walked off, where upon the man followed and used exceedingly abusive language to him,


he continued this language until Father forgot himself and, turning back, slapped the man upon the face in the scuffle which ensued the man bit both Father's thumbs, and scratched his face, it the first fight Father ever had, and this in his forty seventh year.
        Little Jim is now quite sick, we called in Doctor Whyte Friday, he said that if had been suffered to run on it would have terminated in Typhoid fever.
        Miss Mary, Eva, and I passed the day at Mrs. Bry's yesterday, in the evening we went to Monroe for Father.
        I have been very busy this week, have knit a pair of socks. How many more will I knit before the war closes? I am afraid I shall have time to get accustomed to it before I cease, my hand is now quite lame from constant knitting.
Saturday, Sep. 21st/61--
        Father and Miss Mary and both sick again, Father went to bed Thursday and has not been up since, he insisted at first that all he needed was rest and would not let Mother send for the doctor, but yesterday he consented, and Mother sent; Dr. Whyte says that Father has only a slow fever, but that he has needed medicine for some time; he left calomel and quinine. Father is very weak, but feels a little better this evening.
        Miss Mary had a slight chill this morning, and has had fever ever since, as usual she is exceedingly nervous and very much discouraged. Little Jim has been up for two or three days, he is now quite well.
        Miss Mary and I spent Monday at Mrs. Noble's, we were invited there to meet Mrs. Richardson (Mrs. Noble's niece) and her children. She is a very pleasant lady, and we enjoyed the day. Yesterday Misses Puss and Hannah Bry and Carrie Young spent the day with us, I should have enjoyed
myself very much had I not had a headache and been almost incapacitated for enjoyment of any kind, in the afternoon a very heavy rain came up, our house leaked all over, and was kept constantly moving out of the rain.
        This morning it cleared off cool, the air is rather damp, and it has seemed like a real Autumn day, we must expect many such days now, Autumn is really here, many of the leaves are turning and some of the black gum trees are almost bare.
        Mrs. Noble has resigned her position as President of the society, and last Wednesday Mother was elected in her stead.
        I have neglected my journal very much lately, not because I did not wish to write, but because I have not felt justified in taking the time. I have been so busy knitting and sewing that I have not had a moment to spare; the week and months pass before I am aware, and yet, when I look back it seems a long and weary time, the events of last month seem to have taken place almost a year ago.
        I have not written one very important thing, Uncle Dole has a baby, a little girl, she is seven weeks old; Aunt Satira thinks her beautiful. Aunt Mary writes that she and Grandma are knitting for the soldiers. I received a letter from Miss Valeria night before last, they have all had chills, sometimes four or five in bed at once; John and Angus have gone to a military school in Nashville, Tenn.
        I have been so busy that I have not had time to mention in my journal the burning of Mr. Water's house at Amite by some companies of the Polish Brigade which were encamped there, the soldiers had annoyed Mr. Waters very much by stealing his fruit and breaking his trees, notwithstanding he freely gave to them when asked; at last he threatened to shoot them, and finding them in his field one day, he shot at two of
them, not intending however to do more than frighten them, as it happened, he killed one and wounded another, when it was found out many of the soldiers were greatly enraged and coming to his house razed it to the ground, in spite of the efforts of the officers and a few of the men. They broke down the fruit trees and fences, burned the barns, and store room, and demolished a year's provisions. Mr. Waters preserved his life by flight, while the ladies of his family remained all night surrounded by the ruffians, they providentially escaped unhurt. Miss Calwell wrote me a full account of it, in her words Mr. Waters is ruined. They must be in great distress, as he can get no employment, and he had, no property except his house in Amite.
        Miss Valeria says that the people of Amite were in terror lest they should burn the town before they left, there was one company, the Gross Tete Guards, which guarded the town several nights. This is a dreadful tale too tell of our own soldiers, there is but one consolation and this is that they are not our own countrymen, they are, most of them, the low, foreign population of New Orleans. Our country soldiers are many of them accomplished gentlemen, and all are men of humanity and honesty.
        The night is coming on, in darkness and gloom, the sky is grey, and cold, and the north wind sounds drearily, this is one of "the melancholy days, the saddest of the year", our indoor scene is not one to raise the spirits, and when we seek refuge in thought we but increase the gloom. I would not allow weather or privations to sadden me, but I can scarce bear up against sadness when I seen Father and Mother so depressed, Father is so sad. We must try and remember that "though sorrow may endure for a night, joy cometh in the morning".
Friday, Sept. 27th / 61--
        Oh it is cold very cold for September, last night the wind whistled round the house like winter. Pa is having a clay chimney built today. We are going to have a fire in it tonight, it will be so delightful, this morning we all went to breakfast wrapped up in blankets, Father has been wearing a blanket in the form of a poncho all day. Yesterday we all went chinquapen hunting, Misses Puss, Hannah and Florence Bry; Katie and Wiley Noble, Carrie, Adam, Willie and Charlie Young; and all our family except Georgie and John. We went in the great lumber wagon with four mules, carried little Jim and Eldridge along; we went first to Mr. Nash's place, where we found "ever so many" chinquapens, and then to Mrs. Phillips' place, which Carrie said was much prettier to gather them. We ate our dinner there; under some beautiful beech trees, on the slope of a hill where the ground was all covered with green grass and dry pine straw, and where we could get plenty of water from the spring near by; every body was in good spirits and we enjoyed ourselves very much, we did not gather more than two hours and we had over a bushel of chinquapens when we came to divide them.
        We came home before sunset, a long time, but as we carried every body home we did not arrive such before dark; we had two flags in the wagon, and hurrahed at every house we passed, some of the people thought we were soldiers and came way out to the road to see.
        Mother and Father went to Monroe yesterday and took Georgie with them. Miss Mary had a chill Monday; and Willie had one Tuesday. Father is improving, but very slowly.
        Mrs. Batchelor spent the day with us Tuesday, she is a lady teacher who is spending her vacation near here, Mother went to see her the other
evening, and invited her spend the day with us, with a view of forming an opinion of her as a teacher. I think her very pleasant and sensible, should be pleased if we could engage her; she has never taught in a family and is undecided as to whether she would like it.
        The sun is near it's setting and I am beginning to feel cold, I must go and see how the chimney gets along.