Saturday, March 4th. 1865.
        I had no idea that I had neglected my journal so long, however it is not much matter, everything goes on so quietly. We have had a great deal of rain, it has not been fair for three days at a time in two weeks, I have been taking horseback rides on Flora whenever the weather and roads would permit, I enjoy these rides very much indeed. I have been seized with a perfect mania for gardening this spring, and am very much impeded in my operations by the wet weather. We are having a very late spring, the oaks are not yet in bloom. My violets are blooming finely, and the rose leaves are bursting out, I have a lovely pink hyacinth in bloom too, and some narcissus. My dear geranium is quite dead, root and all, I have got a cutting from Mrs. Seale which I think will grow, I have it in a pot in my room, I imagine that I can see the tiny little leaves growing a little. I have also a cutting of the lemon verbena on which I see the buds about to burst. I sent to Mrs. Willson for the spires she promised me, it is in full leaf, and the flower buds we developed but she was so kind as to
take it up very carefully, and I do not think it will feel the transplanting. I spend my recess in the morning in the garden when the weather permits, and I think with Lory's assistance I shall be able to keep it in order.
        Prince came home Thursday night very unexpectedly to us all; he came to bring home Willie's mule, on account of the prevalence at the glanders among the horses of the company; he tried today to "swap" Willie's grey mare with one of the doctors at the hospital but did not succeed, he is to go back as soon as he can and take one of Willie's mares which is not of much value. Willie sent me a letter by Prince, he is quite well and in good spirits, and was very comfortably fixed in a house, but the company had removed to try and get rid of the glanders.
        The news about peace, and the hopes some entertained, are all come to nothing, I hope it has finally convinced every man of any sense that there is no such thing as reconstruction, and I hope that odious word may henceforth be banished from conversation. Lee is not Com. in Chief of the Confederate armies, I hope he may prove equal to this situation as he has ever before been equal to his duties. We know there must be active operations going on in Virginia and So. C. now, and we hear many rumours, some favourable others not, we know nothing certainly, I have great hopes. Mr. Templeton was here last night on his way from Texas, says the roads are very bad. The stage has been very much interrupted lately, I have not received a letter from Miss Mary or Eva for nearly two weeks. I expected a letter from them by Capt. Seale, but he stayed so long they thought he would not call, and sent their letter by mail. Capt. Seale went up to the wedding of Miss Julia Scott and Mr. Groves, he returned Wednesday evening. We sent Miss Mary a
pair of shoes, also a calico dress for her and Eva which Mr. Gordon got when he was in the swamp. Father rode all day yesterday in the rain and a great part of today to get Willie a round jacket, his coat is too heavy for this mild weather; wonderful to tell, Father at last succeeded in getting from the post quarter master (Capt. Oliver) enough grey cloth for a jacket an pants also seven brass buttons and nine horn ones! he got the tailor who is detailed for the regiment to cut the jacket for the moderate price of twenty dollars. Money was very plenty a year ago but now it extremely scares, there is hardly any new issue on this side the Mississippi, and fears are entertained that we will soon have no currency. Father has scarcely any money as he can collect none that is owing to the railroad either from the government or from private individuals. Mr. Noble is here tonight, and I escaped from the parlour to write my long neglected journal. I must stop now, however, as I begin to be sleepy, having sat up quite late last night writing to Willie and to my dear Valeria. I could not wait any longer for a letter from her.
Tuesday, March 7th.
        I am so very, very tired, I have commenced to learn to card and spin, and I never tried anything as difficult to me, or so very tiring. I determined to learn some time ago because I thought it had become a duty, but I disliked very much to commence and had a very good excuse in the want of spinning wheel and cards. Now, however, Father has bought me a pair of cards and Mrs. Whyte has lent me a wheel, so I went down to Mrs. Mary's yesterday to take my first lesson. I was more awkward at carding than I thought it
possible to be, and little more skilful in spinning. I have been at work ever since dinner, and have done a great deal better. I think I should like spinning quite well if it were not for the time it takes. I think I shall advance quite slowly in the study of criticism. I think the trouble I have in learning to spin will make me more patient in teaching the children, or rather will make me more ready to sympathize with them. I never remember having learned anything which was at the same time difficult and discouraging. I forget one exception, music.
        Two soldiers from the other side of the Mississippi, only a month from Richmond, took dinner here Sunday, one was a very good looking and polite gentleman, I suppose an officer from the quality of his dress; he is going to return in two weeks, and promised to call and take letters for us. He did not tell us much news, said that it was probable that Charleston would be evacuated, and that a battle would take place near Columbia, whither Gen. Lee had gone, we may look for victory where he is. This gentleman came from Richmond to Jackson by rail road, which is better than we thought. It is nearly dark and I am so tired I can write no longer. I have a boil on my leg in addition to my fatigue, and that makes me feel it more.
Saturday, March 11th.
        Dr. McDonough came Tuesday night, it was a very pleasant surprise, I was indeed glad to see him, he is still here and will not leave until Monday, he sleeps over at the hospital on account of the night mare which he has so badly that he dislikes to sleep alone, but he has spent every
evening with us, it seems like pleasant old times except that Miss Mary is not here.
        I rode to Monroe this morning with Father, spent a very pleasant hour with Mary and Mrs. Stevens, the affair of the party, which I had some trouble to account for to Mother, was as I thought easily explained. Monroe is in great excitement now, the Rob Roy, Capt. Griffin's boat, has come up laden to the guards with goods and provisions of every kind, even things which we could make here, the street is full of barrels and boxes and crowds of men, many of whom stand gaping and cringing as if they had never seen a boat before and would stoop to anything to get these creature comforts. They say that these goods are to be sold freely and openly to all the citizens. We hear that an order has come from Richmond prohibiting the cotton trade, and ordering an investigation of the matter, I hope it will be carried out. We saw Capt. Griffen this morning, he came up to us as we were waiting for the flat, said I was riding such a fine horse I ought to send to New Orleans for a bridle. I told him we could make them at home.
        We have had heavy frost for the last two nights and I am afraid there will be some tonight, I hope the cold will be over by tomorrow. The river is beautiful now, it is unusually high.
Monday, March 27th. 1865.
        I have just returned from Monroe, went in Saturday principally to go to Church Sunday as Mr. Lawson, the episcopal minister from Bastrop was to be there, he was there and I enjoyed the service and the sermon very much,
after service Mrs. Dortch spoke to me and introduced me to Mr. Lawson and he was very kind and said he would come round and see me in the afternoon, he did so and I told him about how I had wished to see him, and to enter the church, he said he would come down again in about a month and baptize me then, he stayed and talked a good while. I cannot define my feelings now nor then, I was much excited and I am now feeling the effects of it, it all seems so strange to me, so strange to hear one talk to me upon this subject which has always been wrapped up in my own heart, which has been such an ever present thought but seldom or never found expression, it is like a precious, happy secret which has so long been ours alone that it makes us lonesome to share it with others. I know any other course would have been criminal in me with my belief, and I humbly I already feel the blessing of my course. But there are many other things which make me feel sad now, my heart is swelling with tears. There are some whom I love so much that do not feel with me on this great subject. There are other things, too, though this is the saddest. I never felt so much how much society in estranged from Godliness, perhaps not the hearts of many of its members, but the habits and conversation of society. I do not regret those vain things of the world, but it is sad to feel alone among those whom we wish were friends.
        I will only try to do my duty, to act and speak as my conscience tells me I ought, and I must be very careful to keep watch over my own secret sins, God knows how many they are. Oh how can men speak lightly of His name and his worshippers. Above all how can women, women who have so much to suffer, who have so much to fear.
I don't know whether I ought to attribute it all to my religious feelings, perhaps it is also much to my secluded life, but I find but little pleasure and much embarrasment in general society; I do not look for sobriety, I do not expect or wish to exclude gayety, but is there not some favoured society where gayety may be refined by taste and intelligence and regulated by decorum, where wit may be indulged without offending our Maker? I know it is unreasonable to expect in every one a friend, but it seem to me there might be more politeness and as much pleasure if undignified raillery and tasteless nonsense were banished. I have not been away from home before since Miss Mary left, I feel very lonely to return and not find her here. When I feel thus disappointed in the world, heart full of sad and joyful things, then I think of all these I am so far from, and whom I wish for so much.
        Mrs. Dortch's baby was baptized yesterday, she said she wanted me to be it's God Mother, but did not know I was there. Mrs. Dortch is so sweet and good I love her very much. I called on Mrs. Jackson and her daughter Saturday, Mrs. Jackson is a beloved sister-in-law of Mrs. Morancy. I found her and her daughter both very pleasant. Called a few minutes at Mrs. Bry's to return Mrs. Leighton's book; saw Mrs. Willson and Miss Nannie there, was not prepossessed with Miss Nannie. There are many pleasant anticipations among the young people in Monroe about a wedding which is to take place next Wednesday, the parties are Miss Sarah Garrett and Captain Chambliss, it is expected to be quite a gay affair. I am not invited, cannot imagine the reason, Mother is quite troubled about, it is not enough to affect me, it is only a slight, perhaps only forgetfulness from one who is nothing to me.