Lynhurst, Jan'y. 6th/1862.
        We are having delightful weather now, we had a hard rain Friday night, and another Saturday, but Sunday it cleared off cool and pleasant.
        Last week Miss Mary and I planted some Jasmine vines up at the place, they seem to be growing well, we look forward with pleasure to the Spring when our labour will be rewarded by their fragrant yellow blossoms. The house progresses slowly, it is now nearly all raised, and begins to look something like a house, Father has two negro carpenters to help Mr. Axley.
        Friday night I had a most pleasant surprise. Father came home and said that Eldridge had a paper box on the waggon--marked for me. Of course we were all very curious to know who it could be from, and what could be in it. Uncle Jim was sent up to Mr. Axley's to wait till the waggon came, and soon returned with it. When it was opened there lay a very pretty chair made of velvet, ornamented with ribbon and straw and the seat of which, being raised, showed a space nicely lined with flannel, it was a fancy jewelry box from Miss Valeria, she had it made for a Christmas present, and thought it might reach me by Christmas Eve, the taste and beauty of the chair would alone have rendered it acceptable, even had it not been a souvenir of affection from one whose affection I prize so highly, and made too by her own hands.
        Father left for New Orleans yesterday, we expect him back Saturday night.
Saturday, Jan. 11th/62.--
        Miss Mary, Lory and I have been very busy this week up at "the place",
we have been clearing out a path from the house to the hill back of it, where we design making a little jasmine arbour. We worked all day Wednesday, and Thursday and yesterday afternoon, clearing away brush digging up little stumps and planting violets, we are going to try and plant the jasmine vines today.
        Mother received a letter from Mrs. Dwight (the last teacher we wrote to) accepting the situation and saying that she would leave New Orleans on Tuesday, she must have arrived at Monroe last night, Mother has sent in to see if she is there.
        It is with mingled feelings that I see the teachers nearer approach, the predominant one is a desire to begin hard study, but then I cannot but remember how long I have lived a desultory life, it is almost two years since I have been under the direction of a teacher. I know that it will be exceedingly difficult for me to settle into the regular life of school, I am aware that during these last two years I have seen clearly my faults of temper, and I hope that some have been corrected, and their plate supplied by more desirable characteristics; but amid the few flowers rank weeds have begun to sprout, and it requires a daily exertion of self control to subdue that impatience of reproof or contradiction which I fear I can never wholly eradicate.
Wednesday, Jan. 15th/61--
        At length I am able to write "the teacher has come" and more than this, I can say that I like her very much. She came Saturday night with Father, and Monday she commenced teaching, but we have not yet settled into the regular routine of school, as our books have not come, and other things have prevented our being regular. Miss Mary and I are
studying French together, and Mrs. Dwight says we do very well, Mrs. Dwight is fully competent to teach French, for she was born in France, and remained there studying under the best masters until she was twenty-one years old. She has been teaching more than ten years. She is forty-five years of age, has been married twice, and her second husband is still living, she has a daughter, a young lady who has also taught.
        Mrs. Dwight is very tall, but well proportioned, with dark skin, dark eyes, and black hair, she speaks English perfectly correctly but with a slight accent, which at first makes her voice seem rather affected, she is very lady like, very cheerful, and has a good education, built upon the solid foundation of good sense and real literary taste.
        Besides French I study Ancient Geography, Mythology, Rhetoric, Astronomy and am to take philosophy, physiology and arithmetic when the books come.
        Sunday was a very warm day, but at night it became very cold, all day Monday it was cold and gray, snowed some about dusk, Tuesday colder and still gray, but this morning about eleven o'clock the sun shone out, and it has been getting warmer all day.
        Monday morning we came in here for school, but it was so cold, and the change was so sudden that poor Miss Mary took a chill, it was slight, however, and went off, so that she could say her french lesson in the evening, but this morning she had another one before breakfast, it continued for nearly two hours, and she has been in bed all day, she is quite weak.
        We have had a visitor nearly every day this week. Sunday Mr. Pierce, as usual, spent the day with us. Monday Mrs. Mason and Miss Puss Bry spent an hour or two with us in the morning. Mrs. Mason brought me a
basket of beautiful Japonicas and hyacinths with some geranium leaves and periwinkles, the flowers are still quite fresh.
        This morning Major Bry came in and dined with us. Before we had finished dinner Mrs. Craig and Miss Pamela Collins came in, Miss Pamela brought some money which she had had subscribed for the Society.
        I received a letter from Aunt Mary tonight, they hope to start from Georgia by the twentytieth of this month, I do hope they will be able to come.
        Willie has his hands at work clearing up the yard up at the place. I have not been up there since Sunday, I have been so busy studying that I have not had time. I should not have been able to write so long a "journal" this time, had it not been that I am sitting in the room with Miss Mary tonight, and have thus a very good opportunity of writing.
Saturday, Jan'y 25th/1862--
        Just two weeks since Mrs. Dwight came, the time has been in studying hard all day except a short time for a walk. I feel happy now it seems as if I was doing right.
        Miss Mary is quite well again, is taking medicine though, to prevent any more chills. We expect Uncle David and family tonight, they were in Jackson yesterday, Father has gone in with the carriage. I am full of pleasurable anticipations. Weather delightful, cool but not freezing, the roads are good too, and it is Saturday night, just the right time for company to come, I have had time to get all my things in order. Miss Phillips and Carrie Young spent an hour or two with us this morning.