Bayou Tensas still. Thursday morning Oct. 1st.
        In my same post on the back piazza, but how changed the scene, the willows and tall forest trees are brilliantly green, the field of weeds waves and glistens in the clear wind and bright light, and the belt of woods beyond is no longer dim though the bright haze of distance is between us, it is a luxury to gaze on the sky, no longer dim and changeless with the drifting grey clouds but full of life and beauty and movement, clusters and groups of white fleecy clouds variable as the shadows float between us, and the deep bright blue of the sky, such beautiful clouds, now shading a while the glorious sun, now letting a full flood of light on wood and fields, the mud is still here, for the sun only came out this morning, but with all this beauty and cheer overhead and this gentle but spiriting wind we are apt to tolerate more easily the muck and mire below. What spectacle can equal that of the sky, ever varying, ever full of meaning whether dark or bright there is always interest there. Well may Humbolt say that clouds give as much character to a landscape as terrestrial objects, they give more, the earth is the body, the firmament is the life, the soul. Our poor little plants are out in the sun today, the little heliotropes are wilting under his strong beams, but they will revive by and by.
        Father went away this morning to the river to find out a way for us to cross, he may come back tomorrow night but I hardly hope to see him till
Sunday, he says when he returns we shall be decided one way or another. Eva took quinine this morning and I hope will miss her chill. Georgie looks a little pale, I hope he will not be sick
Montgomery's plantation, Choctaw Bayou.Friday, Oct. 2nd. 1863.
        Yesterday the mud dried so much and this morning the sun rose so clear and bright that we prepared cheerfully for the days journey, it is a bright pleasant day with a cloudless sky above, but we soon found that the mud was still bad enough to render travelling very unpleasnat. Father rode Railroad away so Miss Mary was obliged to go in the buggy and I rode on alone for some distance until Willie came up from the wagons. Our road lay through open fields the greater part of the way, field after field, sometimes a mile across, where the woods which bounded them looked almost blue from distance, fields covered with corn and often luxuriant peavines, grown without other care than simply planting, the plantations are separated only by rail fences, not belts of woodland as at home, we only passed through one or two miles of woodland in our journey of twelve miles, and really it was not very pleasant, our horses labouring through the muddy roads and the sun beaming hot upon our unsheltered heads. Mollie did not like it at all, she is a little lame again too. I hated to have her tread in the mud so, but could not help it. We came along quite steadily, only stopping for water once or twice for water, during the whole time, and arrived here about two or three o'clock, this gentleman has three plantations, and only one overseer, when we rode up to this place and asked if them was a white man
here, they told us no, he was at the "lower place" about a mile distant, so we wearily caught up our reins and rode on, when we get there and saw the overseer he said he would sell us corn at a dollar and a half a bushel (when he cannot begin to gather what he has) he asked us if this was Mr. Watling's train and we answered yes, then followed several remarks and he at last advised us to come back here to the first place as there was a very good vacant house and water for men and stock, so we crossed the long bridge which I dread, I never could bear to cross a bridge on horseback, and we were soon established in this clean little house which has several white plastered rooms, a piazza in front, and a little porch behind, the little inclosed lot is covered with bermuda grass in front, separated by a fence is the negro quarter, the ground is covered with bermuda grass and there is a wide street with the neat, white washed cabins on each side, each house has two rooms with a nice brick chimney, and an open roof in front, paved underneath with brick to keep them out of the mud, there is no dwelling house on this place, the negros call this "the doctor's house" I suppose the physician on the place used to live here, it is quite a comfortable little place and I suppose some ladies stayed here, for there is a discarded hoop skirt hanging in one of the rooms. We are to stay here until Father returns, he may come tonight, but we can hardly hope to see him until Sunday. Mr. Duvall says we got on wonderfully well today, only broke a yoke, that was easily repaired, for we have extra new ones with us. I believe we have no really sick ones today, though Eva is pale and Georgie looks badly, Eva missed her chill yesterday and today and I hope will not have any more.
Choctaw Bayou, Saturday evening. Oct. 3rd.
        I have just returned from a pleasant walk down to the bayou where it widens into a lake, and an hours pleasant idleness sitting an the trunk of a large cypress tree lying out in the water, with the solemn, moss hung cypress branches over our heads, and looking at the grave white cranes sitting motionless on the bank or flapping slowly from one side to the other, now and then one would wade out into the stream, stretch his long neck out and stand motionless, watching the water, we amused ourselves very much observing all their motions, at first we counted all we saw, but soon found too many to count, there were two or three of what are called blue cranes but we were not as much interested in these as in the snowy white ones. We were quite excited when George pointed out an alligator lying on some limbs projecting from the water, not far from our standpoint, we tried chunking at him with bark (he was a little fellow) but he paid no attention to that and Eva and I went back to the stump of the tree to get some chips but before we were half way on our return Miss Mary cried out, he is gone. The shore of the bayou near where we sat was grown up in places with cypress knees of a thousand grotesque shapes, some groups of them if inverted would have looked just like great brown icicles. The growth of the cypress tree is so singular and what is strange in this day of popular information, I have never seen any notice of it in books of travel. This growth may not be an isolated one in botany, but I never heard of any like it. These knees, as they are called, are the germs of the future tree, they grow up like stumps, covered with bark and rounded on the top, from which fact they take their name of knees, not a bud or sign of a leaf is seen anywhere about them. I
have never seen any in the transition state, but Mr. Duvall says they grow thus quite tall, sometimes higher than a man, and than all at once put out branches, I should like very much to see some of them budding; I think the cypress is a beautiful tree, this grey moss sems more appropriate to them than to any other, the trees on this lake are principally cypress, draped always with moss. Miss Mary and Loring are hurrying me, they want to go down to the lake and take a boat ride, so I suppose I must leave my book though I am very unwilling.
Monday Oct. 5th. Tensas Bayou.
        It is our task now to retrace our steps. The idea of going to Georgia and all the anticipations--doubtful, pleasurable & painful which it engendered are left behind us, we must do our best to forget them. I said forget, but I did not mean, no we must never forget this journey, its bodily and mental trials and its joys, for joys it has had for me. The experience, the disappointment is useful; I hope, I trust it may not be long before we can say from our hearts "the bud may have a bitter taste, but sweet will be the flower."
        The bud has indeed a "bitter taste" we will not deny that, it is best to admit it, to receive the bitterness and profit by it. Yesterday evening Father returned from the expedition to the river, and be brought the unwelcome intelligence that we had been refused a passport, but I will repeat something of what Father told us, after a full account of his journey to Rodney, he said that when he arrived there he beckoned to the ferry boat, which was a flat owned by two negro men; the Gun boat lay in the
middle of the river, and he wanted the men to take him out to it, they said all the skiffs had just been destroyed by the gunboat, and when he asked if they could not take him out in that, they demurred and confered apart some time. Father perceived at length that they were troubled about the price, he asked them what they charged to ferry any one across, they said ten dollars over and ten back (Father afterwards learned that the regular price was five dollars), he asked them if they would not take him out to the Gun boat for that price and they willingly acquiesced, when Father got out to the boat, the Lieutenant received him and told him he could not come on board, asked his business, Father told him he desired to see the Commander of the boat, the Lieutenant was in command, for the Captain with a squad of his men had recently been captured in a church at Rodney. Father told the Lieutenant that he came to ask permission to cross the river with his family; be enquired if Father was in the army? "No." "You think you ought not to be there, I suppose?" "No, on the contrary I think if I were of the proper age and had no impediment I ought to be there." "Well, sir" was his final answer "you cannot cross here." Father bade him good morning, and went on to Natchez, when he arrived there he immediately went to the Gen'ls office, when he told his business to the usher he was told that he must go to the Provost Marshall, he went there and was told he could not then be attended to, must return at two o'clock, at two o'clock he returned, and after waiting about an hour the Provost came. Father then prefaced his story by telling him that he was the President of the V'bg, Shreveport and Texas railroad, intending to tell him about the negroes, but here the Provost stopped him by telling him
that he knew that; he then asked Father if he considered himself a loyal citizen, Father said "Yes, a loyal citizen of the Confederate States." "I suspected as much, and you come here asking me to assist you in crossing the river." "No," Father said, "I come here asking permission to go across without being molested, I ask no assistance." "You cannot have that permission, if you cross the river you cross at your peril." Father asked him if it would be of any use for him to go to the General, he told him no, that he had just come from the General's office, where he had been conferring with him on this very subject, and the General said be must use his own discretion. Father then said to him, "As a mere matter of curiosity I would like to know how you received your information about me," the reply was "Your curiosity cannot be gratified, Sir." Thus in a few words were crushed all our hopes of getting Yankee permission, it cost them little to speak these words, but how much it cost us to hear them. But even in hearing I felt a sort of exultation in thinking that now we owed them nothing, not even a word of kindness, yes they have refused us the only favour we have yet asked them, we are not oppressed by any sense of obligation to them. Father says while he was in Natchez he saw Old grey haired men and women come to the Provost to ask permission to buy some common necessary of life. The people living in the city have to bring to the Provost a written memoranda of what they want to by, however insignificant the article, and then when they have bought it, they have to bring a bill of it back to the same officer. Father says the city is orderly, no doubt, with such a rule. After telling us all this, Father said the decision was still to make, we could go on, and endeavour to cross the river if we chose, or we could go back
home, the two ways were before us, he could not decide, he did not know which was best, and he thought Mother ought to make the decision; we might possibly get across the river but it was almost certain that we would be discovered, and if we were he felt sure from what he had seen and learned that the Yankees would deprive of everything, literally everything we possessed, and leave us on the bank of the river thus destitute; on the other hand, if we went back we knew what we went to, it was present safety at least, though undoubtedly privation. Willie was in favour of making the attempt, but Father and Mr. Duvall and Mr. Burke all thought the risk too great, and Mother was appalled at the prospect of utter destitution if we were discovered, so at length it was decided that we were to turn back, and Father called up the negroes to tell them the decision; they were all attentive while he told them, and while he added that he had seen in those few days all kinds of suffering that he ever expected to see, he had seen the graves of negroes as thick as the heads before him, he had seen acres of the most miserable little huts opposite Natchez where the negroes were staying, and negro women up to their knees in water paddling out clothes, for want of tubs, he had passed one plantation where there were a hundred negroes with no overseer and they had not a morsel of salt and but little meat; all the able bodied negro men were put in the army, the others were left to shift for themselves. Father told them that he thought he should be able to feed and clothe them for another year here, but that if he were to be discovered in the attempt to cross the river he should be "as powerless as Nancy's baby there." The negroes assented, Mark said he was willing to go back and save what little was left, and so they all said. It is a sad disappointment to Lonzo and Uncle Levi, they were so anxious to go back to
Georgia and so were a few others. Father promised them that they should go there as soon so possible. So it was all said, and he went in the house and thought of the past day and of the morrow, and my poor Father looked so troubled and perplexed and so kind and good. In my childhood I used to think that my Father could never fail in anything, he has failed in this attempt to cross the Mississippi, but in this very failure I love him and respect him more, and he is nobler in my eyes than any man in his success, then even he in his success, if it could be that I could love him, respect him more. Such truth and strength and humility I can never see united in any other. My father! this is full for me of happiness and goodness. I am more sorry on Willie's account than any other, I was so in hopes he could be with John & Angus, but it may be best for him to be here. Father speaks of trying to get him into Harrison's battalion of cavalry, Willie said he did not want to go over the other side unless we went too. We left the Montgomery place this morning quite early, and came over the field to the Tensas by twelve o'clock, of course the ox teams did not get here till later, it is now nearly three o'clock and they are not all crossed yet; we have established our camp on the east side of the Tensas just above the ferry--
Third return camp, Bogue Chitto. Thursday, Oct. 8th.
        I have let two days pass without an entry in this journal, which ought to be faithfully and punctually kept, I have neglected it, for no other reason than just because I did not feel like writing, a poor reason indeed.--
We left our camp at the Tensas as early as possible in the morning of Wednesday, the ox wagons preceded us, for we remembered the rough road, made worse by the recent rain, and hoped that the heavy wagons would smooth the stiff ruts a little. Notwithstanding they did smooth it very much, they made some of the holes worse, and the ten miles drive was very wearying, however, we reached the Maçon and forded it by twelve o'clock, which we thought was very good driving. After resting an hour, in which we lunched, & fed the horses and cattle, we again took up our march, having set Winsboro for our night's camping place. It is twelve miles distant from the Maçon, and a long and weary twelve miles it was to me, Mollie was so lame that traveling was painful to herself and her rider, and I could not chase away by a short galop, as is my wont, the painful thoughts that lengthened the miles to me. When we came into the beautiful woods, I recalled the reflections of my Sabbath ride through them, and they again brought peace and resignation to my soul. Gladly we hailed the sight of the open common and the spreading oak under which we rested on Sunday. It was late before our supper was over and we were ready to lie down to sleep until morning. So we thought, but not so it proved, for about one o'clock we were aroused by Mr. Burke's calls to his "staff," (it was his watch) and by the running to and fro to get the women & children and bedding under shelter. We rubbed open our sleepy eyes, put on our frocks and got the children up, fretting at being awakened. Miss Mary and Willie went on, Miss Mary with a lantern, and Willie with John in his arms; they went to a little house with two rooms which was fortunately on the edge of the common. Hither we all fled except Father, he stayed at the tent to attend
to things there. When arrived at the cabin we got into the room where there was a fireplace and found the small fire kindled and several negroes gathered around it, they made room for us and we gathered around, Mother in a chair, the rest on the floor, some lying and some sitting. After the rain lulled a little we sent down a negro man who brought up two blankets, a large shawl and two pillows, the children stretched themselves on and under these and I lay beside George for awhile, but soon gave my place to Mother for I preferred her chair; from my seat I amused myself (between naps) with the scene around; stretched with their feet on the fireplace and their forms making the radii of a half circle around it, were the white family all seeming sound asleep, ranged around the sides of the room were the negroes, in various grotesque positions, some sitting propped up against the wall, some wrapped in quilts and blankets, giving no indication that it was other than a pile of bed-clothing except by the loud snore that came from its depths, others were lying without blanket or quilt, and Jeff having quietly taken off his coat and laid it under Willie's head (W. was so sound asleep he did not know it) had seated himself on the edge of one of the boards, which formed part of the wall of this dilapidated house, & was sleeping as quietly as if on a bed of down. Through the unshuttered door I saw the floor covered with sleeping negroes lying close together, covered scantily or not at all, but most of them better provided for than we, opposite me by the corner of the fireplace Lonzo was seated on the floor, a basket which he seemed to consider very valuable, by his side, and his arms embracing his knees, which formed a resting place for his head. All this I saw by the light of the dying fire, and it was very interesting to me,
it was at that hour when sleep naturally takes possession of the whole animated world, there was no sound except the loud quiet breathing of the sleepers, and now and then a snore. At last the morning broke, the negroes waked or were wakened singly and in groups, and scattered out of the house, and after combing out my hair and pinning it up I gathered up my skirts and walked through the wet grass down to the camp ground, passing several fires I came to ours. Lonzo, exhausted by his watch the night before, was stretched on the board and again asleep. I enquired of Charlie where Father was, and he directed me to the tent. I found Father there, lying on a pile of mattresses & carpents and so covered up with blankets & comforts that at first I could not find him; he looked haggard when I did see him, and wakened with a start at my kiss. Oh my dear Father, how much trouble, how much wearying anxiety he has now. We found that we need not have moved so precipitately the night before, for our carpet tent had not leaked at all, only a little rain had blown in at one end, Father had not had time to get the bedding in the wagon before the rain came & had lain down under the tent and slept all night. As I watched the sun rise triumphant over the flying clouds that morning I thought with Thompson "Here come the powerful God of day triumphant in the east," it was a glorious sight and a glad one to us. I am afraid I must confess that the thoughts of the grandeur of the sight were soon followed by a comfortable thought that the bright sunlight would dry the wet grass and sloppy roads. The wagons left camp about seven o'clock & we followed in an hour or so, we had gone about a half a mile when we perceived the mule wagon drawn drawn to a halt and all the other mule equipages in front, the carriage had not yet started from
camp. When we came near enough, Loring called to Emmeline "broke down?" she bobbed her head and we knew our fate, we knew it better and with more anxiety though when on riding up we saw Anthony's wagon turned over in a deep and wide ditch, its load partly thrown out. and the negroe men up to their knees in water around, working at the body. The brood wheel of the wagon had slipped off the bank and all had gone into the ditch together, poor Antony, whose negligence had caused it all, looked quite crestfallen. They were still in the ditch, crying out and "heaving"and directing when Father's troubled voice broke in upon us, all had been so busy they had not noticed his approach. Antony immediately commenced his excuse, but it was quite lost in Father's reproof. At length the wagon was pulled up on the bank again, and then the extent of the evil was learned, the back wheel, (the same one that was filled at La Fourche) was "completely smashed up," which means it was to be filled over entirely; well, the end was that they put a drag under the axle, hung the wheel on the back of another wagon and started, but not by any means as easily as I have written it. (Miss Mary and I with the children came on, followed by the mule teams, Mother waited behind for Father.) We (the advance guard) arrived here before twelve, and drew up on our old camping place in the grove. We went up to the house just opposite to see Mrs. Smith about corn and fodder & a shelter but she was gone to Winsboro and there was no one at home but a Mr. Williams, a boarder as he informed us, he gave us quite an autobiography of himself, but did not know anything about our business, except that we could get corn and fodder and that he reckoned Mrs. Smith would let us have what else we wanted, as she was very accommodating to strangers, had been ever since he
had been there, and that was two months & more. We have not found her very obliging, but let that pass, the poor woman has seen much sorrow, she has lost her husband and thirteen children on this very place, her last child died a few months since. Mr. Williams told us that she was a beautiful child of five years old, "the kindest child to be so much spoiled of any he ever saw." (The poor man has none of his own, I expect.)
        It was quite late in the afternoon before the wagons arrived, and they were ready to commence on the broken wheel, but Lonzo and Sandy and Father all worked with other subordinates and they advanced rapidly. The wheel is now nearly completed and it is only about twelve o'clock. I have been writing by snatches nearly all the morning, first seated by the camp fire where Mother and Mr. Duvall were talking on subjects very interesting to me, and for a time when Willie came up I ceased writing altogether. Now I am in the carriage by Georgie, who has had a chill and now is sleeping off the fever. The dear little fellow is so still and patient that he does not interrupt me much; my poor little darling, his face is sadly pale and is growing quite sallow. I wish he were well like John, who is still plump and red cheeked as ever, and--as mischievous. Two soldiers paid us a visit this morning, they are from Bragg's army, left since the fight, two good looking, well behaved young men, one had lost a finger in the fight, poor young man, he was so strikingly like Horace, the same blue eye and yellow moustache and same expression of lip, only he was short and Horace was quite tall. I remember him well, though it has been six years since I saw him last. But I have quite digressed from my subject, it was (?) that
of the fight. This soldier says the two days Saturday and Sunday we gained a great victory, after that there was only cannonading until they left, since then they have heard that Rosencrans was captured, he had been driven to Chattanooga, and we had possession of Lookout mountain. D. H. Hill and Longstreet were near, though not I believe in the action. Oh, I hope it is all true. This soldier said "There were a heap of men killed up there," how sadly true, many a man, and "no man died to himself alone."
        This soldier also told us that someone had tried to cross the Mississippi last week with a wagon, and had been taken; I did say it is best after all that we did not attempt. All other considerations I could cast behind me, but oh, if Willie could only be with Angus and John, I should feel as if I had three brothers together almost, though Willie is dearer, infinitely dearer than they can be, though they are Valeria's brothers.
        I must not forget an important thing I learned this morning. Old Mr. Cole came down here to see about buying the lumber we brought along for a flat, and while he asked how I and Molly got along, he was very much delighted with Molly the day we stopped at his house. I then entered into an explanation of my grievances, and he told me he knew a certain cure for the swinney, he had cured many a horse, I eagerly took it down, and am going to try it in good faith, though Mr. Duvall does say he don't believe it can cure her.
        The weather is now clear and fine, Just cool enough. We shall only follow our old road as far as the Boeuf, where we take a road up by Girard, to leave the negroes there, I am glad we are to take a different road, though I should like to see the beautiful forest of the La fourche again,
but I dread it's bad bridge for the wagons & our old encampment there has such painful associations that I do not wish to see it again till our prospects are brighter.
Boeuf River, fourth return camp. Friday morning, Oct. 9th.
        Last night we arrived at our old camp here, pitched our tent on the same place, and tied the mules to the same tree as we did before. We left Bogue Chitto at about one o'clock, and arrived here at sunset, without any accident. This evening found us all more cheerful than we have hitherto been, and we sat round the camp fire and talked some time after supper, leaving out almost entirely the subject of our future prospects. Today we hope to make Crew Lake, a few miles beyond Girard. This will be a new road for us. Molly is still very lame, hardly able to carry me, she was yesterday evening. I hope she may be improved this morning. I believe I have nothing more to write of importance, and Miss Mary wants to go down and see the wagons ford; I should not object were it not for my remembrance of the oaths with which the first crossing here was accompanied, the sound of profanity makes me feel sick at heart; I wonder how men can dare to take the Holy name in vain.
Millhaven, Saturday, Oct. 10th. 1863.
        We are almost at our journey's end now, indeed this is the end of the journey, for the railroad negroes and Mr. Duvall and Mr. Burke, for here they separate from us, Father is going to leave the negroes on Mr. Gordon's
place, they are to gather corn and live down here untill he can form some better plan. Mr. O'Leary left us yesterday, at Girard. Willie says he felt very badly at leaving, and could not finish a sentence asking Father if ever he worked on a railroad again to remember him. We left Boeuf river yesterday morning, quite early, and came on steadily to Girard, the road was very good, and led through pretty, shady woods, somehow our spirits seemed quite high. I don't know how it happened, for we do not often enjoy high spirits lately; we started at first with the ox teams, but passed ahead of them, and Miss Mary and I had a delightful and exhilarating galop with Willie, which contributed very much to our cheerfulness. We stopped about seven miles from the ford, to get water, and the old negro woman who brought it out asked me where we were going, when I told her she asked if we had not passed a certain house on our way, said she was there, and that she knew Miss Mary and I as soon as she saw us; they had moved from the Manchac, down near New Orleans, and now wished themselves back, this is the story everyone tells, "I wish I were home again." As for me, I was reluctant to leave home, and now, so contradictory am I that I do not long to get back at all; that is as for as I am concerned; I do indeed wish for repose for Father and Mother, they both look weary and worn.
        We stopped for dinner yesterday at Mrs. Raines' place, Mr. Myrick's Mother-in-law; but found to our regret that they had all moved a week ago, started for the west somewhere. After eating our little lunch, we came on to Girard, halted there a little while, for Father to see Mr. Baldwin, and then came on through the swamp, the green trees grew thick around us, and
underneath them the grass spread a carpet of verdure, all brightened by the "western waves of ebbing day." We wound slowly along the crooked road, rough, and broken into mud holes very often, and it was almost dusk when we arrived at Mr. John Webb's, here Father stopped a few minutes to speak to Mr. Webb, who came out to welcome him with much cordiality, and who invited us to remain in his house during the night, but we thought we had better camp as usual, and drove over Crew Lake to what Mr. Webb pronounced the best camping place we ever saw, we found it quite a good one indeed, and I, at least, was rejoiced to arrive there. The oxteams came up about dark, none at all broken, which was quite fortunate over the rough road. One wheel had two or three spokes cracked, but that was done in driving up the hill at the ford when the wagon ran into a gulley and came very near turning over. We had hardly got established at our camp before we heard a sound of hearty greetings and laughing and very soon Mr. Duvall ushered up to the fire one whom he introduced as Captain Justice, he in an old acquaintance of Father's and I have several time heard of him; he is such a character, I have not talent sufficient to draw his remarkable traits, he is a small old man, wrinkled and hoary and looking quite weather beaten though his eye is as bright and his manner as lively as that of a much younger man. He says he has been here a long time, he is now nearly sixty-four years old; "been here a long time" how much poetry is there in this expression, it reminds me somewhat of the answer of the Patriarch Jacob to Pharaoh. Capt. Justice is a man of temper, boldness and bravery it seems, and withal kind hearted and upright; his conversation sprightly and interesting
though his language is rude, and I was so much entertained in listening to him last night that I almost forgot that I had eaten no supper and that I was tired and sleepy. Oh he is such a funny figure and has such a funny way of shutting his mouth and twinkling his eye. When the Yankees passed through here he ambushed himself near his daughter's house with his gun and horse and watched their movements, he said he could easily have killed one or two, but thought he would not trouble them unless they "interfered with the women and then they should have paid for it certing;" he said if he had only known that they were going to camp where they did on Boeuf river he would made many of them fall that night. This is the hardy language of a pioneer of the old times, and Father says he would not have failed to act up to it. This morning he paid us another visit, and when Mollie was led to water some of us remarked how very lame she was, he enquired the cause and on hearing it was the swinney said immediately that he could cure it by rubbing turpentine well into the shoulder, and then ironing it, he offered to take Mollie and cure her in three weeks. I was only too glad to leave her with him as he promised so great a benefit, though I hated to part with her; Willie's pet he always called her, and I always think of her more as Willie's pet than mine; I shall never be able to thank Captain Justice enough if he cures her. It was nearly ten o'clock when we were ready to go to bed last night and I slept heavily after the fatigue of the day, this morning when I rose I was still drowsy and have been all day. We did not leave our camp until quite late and had only advanced two or three miles when we came to the La Fourche, here we found part of a rough puncheon bridge connected with the opposite by an old flat resting on the muddy bottom and with the floor all broken out. Mr. Burke succeeded in
getting his mule over by pulling the bridle hard in front while Father and Uncle Jim beat it behind; Uncle Dick also crossed, his cart and the buggy went over but further crossing was found impracticable and Father went to work to repair the bridge, the negroes soon came up and it was not long before they had poles cut down and the flat floored over with the loose planks lying about, we crossed in safety and then laboured on through the swamp for a long way. The sight of this La Fourche made me feel sick. I rode in the buggy today with Loring and Eva and did not find the change very pleasant. Yesterday when we stopped for dinner Willie found that his dog Watch was gone, Steve said he thought he was back at the ford, and so after some little debating, Willie sent him back on Brandon to get him. Steve is a real dog tamer, and when he walks along with a gun on his shoulder and surrounded by dogs playing around his feet he reminds me forcibly of Rip Van Winkle, his figure adds to the picture very much, he is tall and stoop shouldered, and one of his legs crooks outward at the knee, which gives him a loose, shuffling gait, and which has gained him the name of "crooked Steve," he always has a good natured grin on his wide mouth. Our journey today has been a very fatigueing one, through the swamp, the road was very rough, and when we got out of it we mistook the road and after travelling for four or five miles and going through a long, sunny field where the deep furrows knocked our heads together constantly, we had the pleasure of learning that our road was wrong, and retraced our steps under Mr. Duvall's direction, who had ridden up to inform us of our mistake; we were following Uncle Levi, who said he knew all about the roads, and really he would have led us right if we had followed him a little further; he persevered in his own way and arrived here before we did, when we got back
into the right road, Father was troubled about Uncle Levi and went back on foot to see if he had broken down, and we came and Mother waited for Father and altogether, we all got confused and irritated and heartily tired. At last we all arrived here, before sunset a little, and got into this little house and set to cooking and preparing for the night, It is now dusk, our supper is on the table (one we found here) and we are only waiting for Father, who is now coming, none of us have had a morsel since breakfast.
Millhaven, Monday, Oct. 12th.
        Yesterday Father found that he had something to arrange here which would make it necessary for him to remain a day or two longer than he expected and he came to the conclusion that it would be best to send me on as avant coureur to Dr. Whyte to let him know we were coming and to inform him of our circumstances, so Loring and I are to go this morning in the buggy and come back tomorrow. Our affairs look perplexing now, Mr. Duvall was taken sick yesterday and Father says looks quite badly this morning, so that Father does not like to leave him alone to the care and trouble of the negroes, and he has no one else to leave. I hope it will all grow clearer soon, I have often seen that light dawns just after the greatest darkness, and I have faith that so it will be again. I hope poor Mr. Duvall may recover his strength, I feel the more sorry for him since I have done his injustice in my own mind and now deeply regret it. I have not time to write more. Eva is not well this morning and George has another chill.
Oakland, Thursday night, Oct. 15th. 1863.
        Our three weeks journey is safely ended, I sit by the fire in my own old room and date my journal "Oakland" once more, around me everything is familiar, but these things awaken no joy in my heart, this coming home is sadder than any departure has ever been to me, I feel my heart cold when I know it ought to be grateful, I am grateful, but I am so sad, so coldly sad, God forgive me and deliver me from my own sinful, murmuring heart. I have been busy today unpacking and arranging things. We came home yesterday, Miss Mary, Loring and I came in the buggy and arrived here at two o'clock, the others stopped in town and were later. The house looked lonely and strange, the great empty rooms echoed to the sound of our voices and the yard was littered with fallen leaves and scraps of cotton. Even the beautiful bright sunlight seemed to fall coldly. We tried to give the rooms a better aspect, lighted a fire in the dining room and made it a little less lonesome by the time Mother came. Father did not arrive till nearly sun down, we got the bedsteads set up and beds made and partially unloaded the wagons, then Mrs. Willson and Julia came in, stayed only a few minutes and after they left we had a little bread and meat for supper, called down the two poor couriers who had not eaten since morning, it was late when we retired, the day had been one of painful excitement and some fatigue to me and I was surprised this morning when I opened my eyes to find that it was broad day, shining through the uncurtained windows, but all was still, and I slept again. Poor Loring had a chill yesterday afternoon and another today, Georgie's turn comes tomorrow. Poor children, I am sorry for them. We parted from Willie at Millhaven yesterday, he told
Father in the morning that he believed he might as well hire a substitute as go into the army on this side the river, I could scarcely believe I heard correctly, it would be the saddest sorrow I ever have known for Willie to act thus, but I trust he will not; he afterwards asked Father to see Col. Harrison about taking him into his battalion. Father will see him tomorrow. I sometimes fear I am wrong in my feelings about this matter but honour, right, patriotism, all seem to me to point Willie to the army, I would be so unwilling for him to remain at home . But I am afraid sometimes that I am wrong in wishing him so earnestly to go. I shall never be happy while the war lasts if he does, now in the prospect I recoil from thinking of him and ask myself if I am not cruel and unsisterly, my heart is in chaos, has been since yesterday morning, the pleasure of seeing things take their old familiar place in the house, of arranging furniture and bringing order out of confusion, which used to be so delightful to me, has now lost its charm. My old room with even the glass of heliotrope, on the bureau as of old, and the firelight brightening the white curtains and bed covering and gleaming on polished mahogany fails to warm my heart; If I know myself rightly this cannot last long, the morning will come when I shall not be gloomy any longer, but I feel, I know that there is little joy for me, it may be for a long time, "resignation," I would make the mottoe of my life. I say to myself over and over again, how much blessed I am, above many even in my circle of acquaintances, but this thought, though it causes my heart to fill with gratitude, cannot make me blind to my trial, and to feel that every human being has a cross given them, a cross to be acknowledged & borne not denied and avoided. The true, great


words of Thomas a Kempis rise often in my soul. I believe with him that trial is everywhere and for every human being. My God give me strength patiently to bear what thou shalt appoint.
Oakland, Oct. 20th. 1863.
        Yesterday I recommenced my little school, the children did very well, better in fact than I had dared to hope. I think I shall succeed better with them this winter than I did last. Oh if I could only interest them in their books, I should consider it the highest blessing of my life to be able to do them any good. We have gotten quite regulated now, Father has every one at work under his superintendance and the place has quite a different air from when we came here. I have been doing a little work among my flowers, putting fresh earth in the boxes, separating violets and I have had the little garden manured and spaded, the heliotrope in the garden is covered with blooms, I have gathered four large goblets full since we returned. Amid all these duties I have succeeded by God's grace in subduing my bitter and complaining feelings. I still feel sad very often, but am yet cheerful, my health is very good, my face is full and rosy through the brown, and good health always tends to make me cheerful; there is nothing like work for me, idle and aimless days make me melancholy and miserable. Father has seen Col. Harrison about Willie, the Col. said he would be glad to have him join his regiment, and promised to give him a furlough for thirty days, intimating at the same time that it might be continued until January, he has only authority to give furloughs for thirty days at a time. Willie is to come up and be sworn in today, Father has
gone to Monroe and Willie will meet him there, and return with him, it seems like such a long time since we left him.
        It is very warm today and looks like rain, the cloudy sky is favourable to my little transplanted violets and to the bermuda grass Father set out by the door yesterday afternoon. The clock strikes nine and I must call up my four pupils.
Wednesday, Oct. 31st. 1863.
        We were disappointed in seeing Willie yesterday, he could not have received Father's note, we expect him certainly today, for Father has sent again for him. Mother is going in town today to bring Willie out and also to see Mrs. Stevens who has returned to Monroe. Father brought home some news last night which was quite sad for us to hear, Johnny Davis is at work for the Yankees, or, what is worse, for a reprobate Southerner called "old Montagu" who is perfect traitor to the country, and is working several plantations owned by refugees. I am so sorry that Johnny Davis should act so, it is disappointment too, we all had such high opinion of him; he wrote back to Mr. McGuire what he had done, I should not have thought he could have so much hardihood as to write of it. Mother thinks there may be some extenuating circumstances as he is very young, and his Mother may have influenced him to act thus in view of her poverty and necessity. We ought not to judge too harshly, we can never know all the motives one has, nor can we know the full strength of the temptations which assail others. How often have I condemned when I thought myself fully warranted in doing so, and afterwards have found the innocence of the supposedly guilty person,
and felt myself deeply regretful of my harsh judgment, how true it is that God alone knows the hearts of his creatures, and God alone should condemn. I feel that it is my Redeemer alone that mercifully saves me from being as guilty as many of my fellows. We have not yet had the expected rain though it is still warm and cloudy, too warm to continue long at this season. Yesterday we did better in school than the day before, Loring was quite passionate over his first reading lesson, because I would not tell him every difficult word, and George was a little reluctant to come in school, but with these exceptions all went smoothly enough. Loring recited his other lessons perfectly and left the school room in high good humour.
Friday, Oct. 23rd.
        Wednesday evening Willie came, we were all so glad to see him, John and George ran and clasped his knees the moment he alighted from the carriage, and John immediately pulled him in the pantry to the safe to get him a piece of candy. Willie only remained one night, the next morning he and Father went to Col. Harrison's camp where Willie was sworn in and took his furlough, he then went down to Mill Haven. He says Capt. Justice says that Mollie is quite well except the healing of her shoulders, he thinks he has stopped the swinny.
        Agnes Willson spent the day with Eva Wednesday, Julia sent me, by her, a beautiful boquet of rich flowers, dahlias, cape jessemine, lantanas, hybiscus, pomegranite and several others. The long threatened rain came last night, the whole day had been gloomy and cold and soon after supper the rain commenced, accompanied by a cold wind, it continued through the
night, and this morning as I sit by the fire writing, the rain splashes regularly outside, such a cold, gloomy low rain, and the heavens are so covered with clouds that I can with difficulty see to write so far from the window.

                            The melancholy days are come
                            The saddest of the year--
                            The gentle race of flowers
                            Are lying in their lowly beds
                            With the fair and good of ours,
                            The rain is falling where they lie
                            But the cold November rain
                            Calls not from out the gloomy earth
                            The lovely ones again.
        These lines were in my thought last night and sadly my heart echoed them as I thought of a distant grave.
        Miss Mary took her first music lesson from Mrs. DeLory yesterday, she is to go in town twice a week to take a lesson. Loring drove her in yesterday, with two of our pupils being absent, we were only in the schoolroom an hour or two. Georgie is progressing, can spell six seven words, I do not make him learn the a - b abs, but have him read and learn words by observing them in sentences in connexion with others, in this way he will not forget them, and it is much more tolerable to him than the dry columns would be. It has some disadvantages, I know, but fewer I think than the other way.
        Lucy Seale and Mrs. Norris rode up to see me Wednesday afternoon, Lucy was dressed, as she always is, with the utmost neatness, in black
riding dress with white collar & cuffs and black velvet cap with a white plume, she told me that Mrs. Wilbur Compton had been very ill, and had lost her little baby with the diptheria.
Monday. Oct. 26th.
        I rose very early this morning, the round moon was shining brightly into my west windows and did not set until I had been up some time. Father and I were the only ones stirring in the house, so I have gained time to write and read a little before breakfast, besides having my hour for devotion, quiet and alone.
        Willie came home Saturday night, and spent Sunday with us, he is going back this morning, he and Mr. Duvall have moved up to Mrs. Willson's place, "Limerick," where they are to remain until they gather her corn. Willie makes excursions continually in search of hogs and cattle and other animals for food, so that he can scarcely be said to remain anywhere, he looks so well now, his health seems completely reestablished, he has not had a sick day for a long time. Mr. Duvall, poor man, continues very delicate, Willie says he eats scarcely anything and when he does take a little meat and bread he says he has taken too much, poor man! I am so sorry for him.
        Mr. & Mrs. Barr dined with us yesterday, called on their way to Homer from Mrs. Barr's Father's in Tensas. We were very glad to see them, and sent many messages to them all at Homer. I should like so much to see Mrs. Barr and Mrs. Morancy and the baby, I told Mrs. Bowmar Barr to tell Mrs. Morancy to be sure and write to me. Dr. McDonough also dined with us yesterday, so that with the company & Willie and the couriers we had quite a
long table. Willie brought us some excellent mutton and beef when he came up, so we gave them a very good dinner. Dr. McDonough has been over three times since we returned, and now that we are getting a little acquainted I like him very well, he is intelligent and well read I think, and talks very well when he forgets his bashfulness. We are getting quite settled now, Father is learning something about farming, it is so amusing to hear him directing about the feeding of the pigs & cows and mules, and to hear him talking about plowing. Mother said she had a square in the garden she wanted ploughed for shalotts, and he even said he thought he could plough that much himself! Although it is such a new and strange business to Father he is bringing everything into order and improvements are going on all about; Oh, I do so wish this might be our permanent home, I mean our home for this short life, but I suppose that cannot be, I never look upon it as such now; but now that we are getting settled down again and building houses and chimneys and talking about how our peach trees will bear next year, and how grape vines must be set out in the spring, and trees pruned and seeds sown. I think how delightful it would be to work thus year after year and see one years work in the improvement of the next, and the place is growing into my heart more closely and deeply. I once thought it was parted forever, but it was ordained otherwise.
        I am reading Cosmos again, am only in the third volume, for nearly half a year I had not opened the book until this last week. I am reading "Kenilworth" aloud, we all find it extremely interesting, but feel sad all the time that it must come to such an unhappy end. I think no one ever drew characters and scenes more true than those of Scott and such a multiplicity,
in that lies the wonder and the charm.
Thursday, Oct. 29th. 1863.
        Tuesday morning Mrs. Willson sent to borrow the buggy and after a while Mother decided to lend it to her and send Miss Mary in to her music lesson in the carriage, and proposed that I should accompany her and go to see Mary Stevens, so I went, for I wished very much to see her and Mrs. Stevens. After leaving Miss Mary at Mrs. DeLary's I drove to Mrs. Dr. McGuire's, only intending to spend a few moments, for my errand was to get some hops for Mother and to reborrow Lamartine for myself, but I lengthened my few minutes very astonishingly, for I like Mrs. McGuire very much and could not break from her conversation, continuous, varied and interesting as well as discriminating and kind, how many adjectives! but they are all just, she is of french parentage, but married an American, and retains her vivacity and penetration in her age and in spite of a life full of sorrow, she has lost her husband and her family of children, as well as many relatives; her parlour is a perfect room of curious and pretty things, so crowded together that one can hardly distinguish their beauties, and the walls papered with the old fashioned, large figures are hung up to the low ceiling with family portraits and good engravings, then she has a large library and a greenhouse and a large garden.
        From Mrs. McGuire's I went to Mrs. Steven's where I met a quiet but warm welcome from May and her Aunt, Mrs. Stevens looks sad and much older to me than when I saw her last; May is much improved, the stony look of sorrow has left her face and I have seldom seen a sweeter expression, it
beatified her plain features and after I returned home often while reading, her large open blue eyes with their mild, kind light, and the softened smile on her mouth would come between me and the page, and withdraw my attention from stars and planets to human life. I read in May's face that her deep sorrow had been blessed to her, and I am so glad. Yet her lot is a sad one, resignation, though peaceful, is not joyous, and how many, many times the thought of her irreparable loss must come upon her. If I, with all my blessings, am often yearningly sad, what must she be. We did not speak of their grief but once when I spoke of our return home Mrs. Stevens said how blest we were to be able to return as we had left, and I could say nothing, while my heart wept for her, and while I thought of my own wicked ingratitude on this same return. We conversed cheerfully of many things, and when Miss Mary called for me I regretted that we could not remain longer, Mrs. Stevens and May pressed so to do so, but Uncle Jim was needed at home so we could not stay. They said I must come and spend a week with them, Mrs. Stevens said it was "so lonely," I should like to very much but cannot think of it at present, the children are getting so well commenced in school. George is learning rapidly, Loring does very well and is improving today and yesterday I had some trouble with him but he has a cold and I had him commence a new lesson, learning the states and capitals, a difficult lesson for a child, and I would not give it to him, but I have no maps to teach it otherwise, a large map of the former United States would be a great aid in our school room.
        During our ride home from Monroe Miss Mary entertained with a description of her lesson and her teacher, and an account of a proposed concert near
Christmas, but after she tired of talking and we had passed all the soldiers and rolled along the quiet road, I thought of many things, but my thoughts dwelt with a passionate yearning on my dear friend, I thought of her, far away, maybe suffering. I have no idea where she is, have received no letter since July and my letter sent by Johnny Davis, directed to Miss Harrison was I think taken by the Yankees. John gave it to a Mr. McKinny who was taken prisoner and searched on his way, even if I knew where she was I have no opportunity of sending a letter. I want to see her, sometimes the longing grows painful, I know that she loves me, and I feel in her such a perfect confidence of sympathy. Oh there is nothing so comforting, so lovely as a pure friendship, nothing except that mystic bond of a pure love which for me is only, can only be in imagination or in the lost and irrecoverable, and in friendship there is a quiet sweetness which belongs to that alone, a community of age, of feelings, of ideas exists between myself and Valeria which I hold with no other. I may be long separated from her, but this true affection must ever be one of my greatest blessings, my dearest joys. Sometimes I feel we shall never meet again, but this is an idle fear, it may be so, but I should not let the anticipation of a possible evil trouble me.
        It is now past sunset, the short winter twilight is fading, the day has been rainy and cloudy by turns, and I am sitting by my window, the sash is raised for the air is not cold, the hillside is no longer green, but varied with the rich colour of fall with a few green leaves and above all, the dark, strong tinted foliage of the pine, the rosy light comes through the light clouds and pervades the air, but as I write it grows dim
and the darkness comes on, but even the dusk has a tint of rose.
        This is Willie's twenty second birthday, he was here yesterday, but could not be at home on his birthday as we wished, he only stayed to dinner with us yesterday, he works so hard, his aid is invaluable to Father. My dear Father, his cares wear upon him, his expression is changed to one of constant care and anxiety and his voice has taken a tone of sadness that makes the tears start to my eyes when I hear it, his talents are the same, he still accomplishes very much, but how it would gladden me to see again the clear, bright glance of his eye, I have never seen a man's eye with such a beautiful expression when he is well and happy, it is so clear one feels that no falsity, not the shadow of it is there, and it strong and boyish in perfect innocence and it kind of gaiety and yet one feels that they can perfectly trust their life even, to him. I cannot express the "expression," I once pointed it out to Valeria, and she recognized it immediately.