Saturday, Oct. 10th/62.--
        This is an ever memorable week to me, for this week we moved downstairs, and I feel once more at home, yes at home again after five years of wandering, five years in which I have experienced my first considerable trials, my first disappointments, five years in which I known much happiness, and lastly, greatest of all, years in which I hope, I believe, that I have been able to see the light that dwells in darkness, and to draw near to the holy of holies. My heart
fills with gratitude as I look around my quiet, comfortable room, with its white curtains and coverings, and all my furniture disposed just as suits me, then the warm sun comes in at the south windows and on the west I look out on the beloved hillside, still green but which will soon be brightened by the many colored hues of Autumn.
        It is quite cold today, and it was not till ten o'clock this morning that the sun was able to penetrate through the cold gray clouds which covered the sky, but now it is shining brightly and I no longer shiver, though I still wear a shawl.
        This morning we had three men here to breakfast who were on their way to get salt for the volunteer's families, they told Father if ever he was in their country and wanted a meal to come to them "we are all Confederate brothers you know" said one.
        While we were at dinner a man came up and asked one of the servants if he could get dinner for six, "Are they soldiers?" said Mother, "they don't look like it ma'am", she answered "well" said Mother, "tell them they can't have dinner, I have only enough for my own family", he went out but the other four came in, said they were soldiers, we all begged for them and Mother sent Miss Mary out to tell them to come in, there were three Texans guarding a deserter, he was an irishman who had been hired as a substitute, we all pitied him very much, but he did not seem at all distressed.
        Reuben came back from the salt works yesterday.
        I received a letter from Miss Valeria day before yesterday, Angus had been home on a furlough, and John came out of the battle safe, I was so glad to hear it.
        Father received a letter from Mrs. Veader Friday, she had just
arrived in Savannah, had been at the North two years, she said we could form no idea of the bitterness of feeling at the North; she has a brother imprisoned by them in New Orleans, he was arrested without knowing for what.
        We heard today of a defeat sustained by Price and VanDorn, from Rozencrans, (despicable german!) they say, however, that there were twelve Yankees to our one, we have heard no particulars but Father says he thinks Van Dorn must be to blame, for Price is to good a General to give battle under such circumstances, at any rate, we cannot expect to have so many victories with not one reverse.
Wednesday, Oct. 15th--
        Father left us yesterday evening to be absent a whole month, how long the time seems! he is gone to Georgia.
        We have a poor woman staying here tonight for whom my heart bleeds, she went down to the camps on horseback with her baby, only seven months old; to nurse her husband, when she arrived there this morning she found him dead and buried. She is now on her way back to her sad home. She is a very young woman, apparently quite poor, and has no parents living, as I hear her deep and frequent sighs from the adjoining room I can only pity her and be grateful for all the blessings that surround me. Oh! how many, many such widows this war will make, nay, has already made; scarcely a family but has lost one member.
        Willie has not been very well today and yesterday, Saturday he took a ride of thirty miles after some oxen, and again Monday, since then, he has been very tired.
        Mrs. Young has a baby boy, born today.
Tuesday, Oct. 28th/62--
        Oh! how cold it has been, I shiver to think of it, Saturday night my flowers froze in my room, and I could not keep warm in bed, though
I had a quantity of cover. Sunday it was still cold, and froze again that night. Monday we could not have school on account of the weather, today it is quite pleasant, but is still cold.
        I spent Saturday with the Misses Compton, passed a very pleasant day, in the evening Col. Gibson, from Mallison Parish, who has been up at the salt works making salt, came in, he is a very pleasant gentleman indeed. Mrs. Dwight moved into her new room yesterday, it is all ceiled and therefore more comfortable than the other, though she cannot yet have a fire, for the chimney is not quite finished; I have not been able to have a fire in my room yet on that account. They are building the brickkiln now, and I hope the chimneys will be finished before we have any more such cold weather.
        My poor little Valeria had some of her leaves frozen the other night, but one side is still green and untouched; I could not bear for it to die, it's name endears it to me.
        We have not heard from Father since he left, the two weeks past seem a long time, and I long for the next two to be past. We have heard of a victory gained by Bragg over Buell in Kentucky, the battle is said to have taken place some weeks ago, but we have not yet heard any particulars of it. Carrie Young came over here yesterday evening, she looks quite thin.
        Mr. Drake called here this morning, has been to Texas, he was looking very well.