Saturday, Nov. 2nd/1861--
        Father left home a week ago last Monday for New Orleans, we have missed him very much indeed. This past week has been a very busy one, with us, Mother has been making two or three winter dresses and altering some old ones, I made a dress for myself this week, it is only the second one I ever made. I have been very busy sewing every day and this morning I worked too, this evening I have been writing some letters.
        Mother is weaning John, poor little fellow, he does not cry much, but looks so pale and pitiful, he is fonder of Mother than he was when
she nursed him.
        This evening a man, his wife and child came here to know if they could stay tonight, they had moved from Mississippi and came out from Monroe in a hack, they had applied at several places for a night's lodging, and had been refused, Mother could not turn them off, she told them they could stay until Monday.
        Last week we had delightful weather, neither very warm nor cold, the last day or two it has been really cold, this morning there was a heavy frost on the ground.
        Poor Willie had a chill last night, he has been up all day today, but looks badly.
Monday, Nov. 11th/61--
        Father returned home last Tuesday night, and left for New Orleans again this morning, he went to Monroe every day last week, except one, so that we had no pleasure of his society, in this way we must expect to spend the winter.
        Willie had a chill last night, he is almost discouraged, and no wonder, he has been having chills now since last summer.
        John has been quite sick, he still looks as white and fragile as a lily, but his eyes are very black, and shoot glances of fire at any one who crosses him, he will not be petted by any one but Mother, I scarce dare to speak to him or look at him.
        We all went to Church, yesterday, morning, heard a very excellent sermon, though not a polished one, one comparison struck me as particularly just and original, in illustrating the Providence of God the minister said "God's Providence may to likened, to a very long chain, which stretches from the creation of Adam to the end of time, to make
you understand more clearly, suppose I had a very long chain, and should fasten one end of it on this earth, and should hitch the end to the farthest off star that the best improved glasses have ever enabled man to discover, and suppose that each link of that chain were so small that it could just be discerned by the natural eye, and suppose you could only see one of those links at a time, then you would see a far greater portion of that chain than any one man sees of God's Providence during his whole lifetime!" was ever the most polished rhetoric more impressive than these energetic words.
        Mr. Pierce came over to see us in the afternoon, he says he has not had a chill in more than two weeks, Willie prophesied that he would have one soon. The weather is very warm, while I write I am in a perspiration, and this on the tenth of November, the warm breezes are sending thousands of dead and dying leaves to the ground, and it seems strange to look out on the brown woods, a few days ago clad in gold color and crimson, and now so changed, but one thing remains steadfast, the unchanging pine still rears it's dark green head, withered neither by frost or heat.
        Aunt Jane and Miss Mary Stephens spent the day with us Saturday, I was glad to see them.
Wednesday, Nov. 13th--
        I have been busy writing all day, and feel quite tired, but must write a few lines in my journal.
        Eva and I are quite alone this evening, Mother has gone to Mrs. Axley's and the children are out gathering hickory nuts. Eva is almost sick with a cold. Misses Joe and Phoebe Friend spent the afternoon with us yesterday, Carrie Young and Mrs. Cloud also called.
        I received a letter from Miss Valeria. yesterday, she says Angus has been very sick since leaving home.--It is still very warm.


Friday, Nov. 15th--
        This is the fast day appointed by our President to pray for a continuance of those blessings which God has thus far bestowed upon us. I could not go to Church this morning as the Church where meeting was held today is four or five miles distant, and Willie could not spare the mules for us to go. I have not eaten any meat or butter, however, and having been reading newspapers and knitting socks all day. Truly we have reason to fast and pray, for war now encompasses us on every side, and though God has thus far enabled us to ward off our enemies, yet we have much more to do ere we establish our independence.
        On the 7th there was an attack made on our troops opposite Columbus, Ken. our force stationed there was very small, and being overwhelmed by superior numbers retired to the river bank and awaited reinforcements, these soon came, and charging the enemy forced them to fly in confusion to their transports, we gained a complete victory, although their numbers were superior to ours.
        A part of the great northern fleet attacked the South Carolina coast on the 10th and took two of our batteries, they also gained possession of the small town of Beaufort and were expected to attack Savannah, but a large body of troops were ordered out to guard the city, and the railroad guns were mounted, and vessels sunk in the channels and it is thought that, should they attempt a landing they could not fail of being repulsed.
        East Tennessee is reported to be in an insurrectionary state, several railroad bridges have been burned, and the country said to be in a state of great excitement.
The officers and crew of the privateer Savannah have been tried and found guilty of piracy, President Davis will fulfill his threat of retaliation, and the prisoners in our hands have drawn lots, if our privateers are hung; Col. Corcoran of the United States army, two Capts. and ten Lieutenants will suffer the same ignominious death; is it not horrible! every day increases my abhorrence of Lincoln and his parasites.
        Fremont is withdrawn from the command of the western department, and Hunter appointed, great dissatisfaction is felt in the west, and it is said that threats are made of appointing Fremont military dictator of the West, a military dictator in the United States! a military dictator to rule over the race which produced a Washington! they are unworthy of the heritage of this name, his hallowed birthplace owns not their rule, henceforth Washington, the Father of our country, his memory, his virtue, his valor, they remain the heritage alone of his native state, and the fair sisters that with her form our youthful Confederacy.
        Gen'l. Scott has resigned, but with what different feelings do we hear it than we did five months since, when every heart beat high with exaltation and every eye glanced proud welcome to the old soldier, faithful to his native land, when every Virginian as they met, each shook hands over the tidings, and every Church bell rang out a glad welcome, but we were mistaken, he was a traitor, and he is now fallen-- below our indignation we look upon him with pitying, contempt, in all his pride of Generalship he has succeeded in wounding only himself, and as he has been able to do us no harm, so his resignation can do us no good. He has been careful in the terms of his with-drawal from active service to proclaim still a friend to his country's foes, and as such
all must regard him, a powerless friend, an equally powerless foe.
Nov. 16th, Saturday.--
        Father came home last night, he is quite well. He brought a letter from Mrs. Aucorn, a lady teacher in New Orleans, who applied to Mother for a situation several weeks ago, she wrote stating the branches she teaches so candidly and her situation too, that Mother and Father concluded to take her. She is married and has two children, but her husband is in the army, and his pay is insufficient for their support. I am glad we have at last engaged a teacher, I feel that after the desultory life I have been leading lately, it will be hard for me to settle down, to my studies, but I feel that I am ignorant and I really want to learn, then too the other children must have a teacher, Miss Mary and Eva are fast growing up, and they scarcely know the elements of education.
        The weather today is cool and cloudy, a dense fog settled last night before dark, and is just now clearing away.
        Father has just left for Monroe.
Tuesday Nov. 26th/61--
        My seventeenth birthday; I cannot but think of my last birthday and the retrospection makes me sad, how many changes have taken place since then, how short the time seems, and yet in that short time our infant Confederacy has sprung up, where are now the enemies who boasted that we should be hushed into quietness as easily as the Mother hushes a fretful babe! there is much, very much to be thankful for, why does my heart ever cry more?
        But my birthday has been very pleasant, and enlivened by an unexpected visitor, yesterday morning Lory came it and said that there was a buggy coming with a lady in black, and a negro man in it, we
could not imagine who it could be, the lady stopped at the gate and Emmeline went down to see her, she soon came up, saying that it was a lady traveller who wished to stop eight or ten days, Mother exclaimed "We cannot take her in, our family is too large, we are expecting a teacher, and haven't any room, go down and tell her I can't possibly take her, show her the way over to Mr. Adams' " so saying Mother hurried out upon the piazza, but what was her horror to see the buggy driving off and the lady traveller walking up to the house. "What could Emmeline mean by letting the buggy go off, who knows who she might be," but when the lady arrived about half way up to the house I heard Mother exclaim "isn't that Mrs. Horne", and, sure enough it was, we were very glad to see her; she and Mr. Horne had just come to Vicksburg to attend to some business and are going back to Georgia to spend the winter.
        Major Bry spent the day with us Sunday, and Mrs. Bry and Misses Puss and Hannah came over in the afternoon.
        Captain Smith, one of the directors in the railroad came down Sunday night, he went away, this morning, Father has been trying again to buy Mrs. Richardson's place, he wrote up to Capt. Smith to try and buy it for him, but he could not succeed, he is now going to try and buy five or six acres to put the house on, it is not framed yet, and Father wants to move it over on the place we first selected, that is, if he can buy enough land to put kitchen and outhouses upon. The weather is quite pleasant now, it rained last night, and has been a little cloudy today.
        Mrs. Marks is spending, the day with us, in honour of my birthday. Father and Mr. Horne went into town today.
Saturday, Nov. 20th--
        Mr. and Mrs. Horne left us Wednesday, Father and Mother went into town with them, I spent the day at Mrs. Friend's Wednesday and enjoyed it very well. I had sent word that I was going but the boy did not carry the message and they were not expecting me, they thought it was one of the children knocking and bade me come in very carelessly. I was very much surprised at this but entered accordingly. Misses Nancy Neal Joe, and Phoebe Friend were sitting around a quilting frame, their tongues keeping time to the motion of their needles, all except Miss Nancy destitute of the expansive appendiges hoops, they greeted me warmly, however, and we soon resumed the animated conversation which I had interrupted.
        Mr. and Mrs. Friend soon entered, and inquiries about the health of our respective families having been exchanged, I was asked if I know how to quilt. I was obliged to confess my total ignorance of that female accomplishment, at the same professing my desire to learn. I was invited to take a seat at the quilting frame and immediately found to my great satisfaction that my quilting was unequaled in smallness of stitches, and the accuracy of the lines by any of my companions, though I must in candor say that while I was quilting one shell they had finished three! I always like novelty, and was very much pleased with my new accomplishment.
        In the afternoon we walked over to see Miss Applewhite, who--with her Mother, Mrs. Simmons, lives very near the Friends. I found them at home and was soon on easy terms with Mrs. Simmons, whom I have met once or twice at the Society. She is a very neat, pleasant lady, and her daughter a modest, pre-possessing girl. Mrs. Simmons was carding cotton rolls; my experience about carding lint had been very favourable, and
begging the use of her cards for a few moments I made half a dozen very good rolls with a little instruction from her, the good lady was pleased to say that she had no doubt I could learn to spin in a very short time. After staying about two hours, we returned to Mrs. Friend's and Willie being there waiting for me, we mounted our horses and came home; here let me remark that it is no pleasure for me to ride Railroad any more, he is as lazy as he can be and stumbles nearly every step, he nearly fell down with me Wednesday.
        Father left us for New Orleans Thursday, he will bring Mrs. Aucoin back with him, that is, God willing.
        Willie had a chill Thursday, it was very slight however. Today is very pleasant, considerably colder than it has been for several days.--
        Mother and I went over to Mrs. Drake's Thursday. Mrs. Anding was over here this morning. Mr. Jones came down Thursday, took Dave home with him.
        I am reading "Woodstock" aloud, and Miss Mary is here begging me to go and read it to her, so I must not write any longer.--