Thursday, Nov. 3rd.
        Tuesday after we had been at school a few hours, one of the children at the window called out "There is Miss Kate Stone" I looked out and sure enough she was there and Lucy Seale with her, of course we could have no more school. Kate was on her way to Texas, Lucy stayed until Wednesday morning. She is so hard to entertain, seems restless and dull all the time and never manifests animation on any topic of conversation except that of "the beaus," the day was a true November day, rainy and dark, in fact we have had nothing but clouds and dampness for the past week, today it has not rained, and has become much colder. Kate left this morning. I am afraid she will have a hard trip, the roads are so bad.
        Father and Willie left Tuesday morning for Vienna, from there Willie is going on to Texas with the runaway negroes, poor fellow! he will have anything but an agreeable trip, especially in this weather, I am very much afraid he will be sick again. Father returned from Vienna last night. Father has had my little garden so such enlarged, it is now twice it's former size, we have been attempting to lay it out this evening but have made but slow progress--
Wednesday, Nov. 9th. 1864.
        Yesterday was a day which will be ever memorable on this continent, the election day in the United States, what a struggle it must have been! We cannot hear the result for some time, we shall wait with great anxiety, there is probably more solicitude about this election in the South, and more excitement in the North than in the one of four years ago.
        I have been very busy in my little garden, planting some violets and
hyacinths, we have laid out half of it in beds and I think it will look quite pretty, it is a great pleasure to work in it, rests my mind a great deal but is very tiresome to the body, my shoulders ache me badly, but this is nothing, nothing to the trouble and anxiety and weariness of my mind this morning, sometimes I feel as if I am doing no good to the children. Oh! if I could only be more patient, if I could only subdue my nervous irritability, I am so much to blame, I should have learned better self control. But the children hurt me so, Loring and Eva by their disregard of my feelings, by their want of love, which they show very often when I correct them ever so mildly, and that irritates me and makes the matter worse instead of mending it. I have resolved and resolved over and over again but it is so hard to see the point of severity to which my duty should make me go, God help me I pray, I am too weak and sinful to aught alone.
        A Mr. Vandenberg whom I met in Monroe, not long ago, came here Saturday to tune my piano, it is quite improved though it does not sound as sweet as I had hoped it would. I suppose that is the fault of the instrument, not the tuner. Miss Mary and Eva have commenced to practice again.
        I have been so busy with school and my garden lately that I have had little time to read in my "Girondists," am very much afraid I shall not be able to finish it this month. We have not yet finished David Copperfield, are in the most exciting part of it now, though to me the book is not exciting, it may be because I have read it before, but I think not, it is too deeply pathetic to be exciting.
        The weather has for a day or two been very cloudy and as warm as summer but it has cleared off pleasantly cool this evening. Dr. Furness was over Sunday night, says he thinks Mrs. Oliver in a very critical situation, I
do indeed hope she will recover. I have had the pleasure of seeing Dr. Bluebecker lately, he spent the evening with us about two weeks ago, I like him tolerably I think, would like him better but that he has such a peculiarly weak, thin voice, which strikes one unfavourably. I think a great deal of character is manifested in the tones of voice. Dr. Melton came over about a week ago with Capt. Oliver's brother. I liked Dr. M. no better than at first, though his conversation was more pleasing, not being on political matters.
Tuesday, Nov. 15th. / 1864.
        This is Georgie's seventh birthday, how fast the children are growing up! it does not seem like seven years since we left Georgia, but it seems as if we had been here such a long time, our old home and all the associations of my childhood are like a dream. We have holiday today in Georgie's honour, and I have been writing letters all the morning, it is a murky, chilly day, peculiarly suited to letter writing, but now that my correspondence is so irregular and uncertain, I do not take that lively interest in writing that I used to. We have had such delightful, clear, warm weather lately, so unlike November. I have spent almost every afternoon in my flower garden which is beginning to assume a somewhat orderly appearance. I was in the garden Saturday when I was delighted by a visit from Mary Stevens and Eliza Baker, we spent a very pleasant day, what made it doubly pleasant was that it was Father's birthday and the anniversary of his and Mother's wedding, they have been married twenty-four years. I like Miss Eliza Baker very much indeed, she is only sixteen and is quite girlish and
unaffected. Miss Mary rode with them about a mile on their way home, and enjoyed it very much, as we also did the walk back in the clear quiet evening light. Father received a note from Willie, dated a week ago Sunday at Shreveport, he was quite well and had carried all the negroes that far quite safely. I received a letter from Grandma and Lois last week, it was written in July, they were quite well. Also received one from Julia Compton, she had been sick but was then better.
Saturday, Nov. 19th.
        The day is dark and cold, it has been rainy since Wednesday evening, yesterday we had a very hard rain, but today it seems preparing to turn to one of those cold, cold seasons which at this time of the year generally follow a long rain. The wet ground and the gloomy sky confine us indoors, and I have spent time since breakfast engrossed in the bloody annals of the reign of terror, and pitying the unhappy fate of Marie Antoinette and her royal children. I feel very quietly happy today notwithstanding the book I have just left, for Willie is at home again, the same dear, kind brother with his soft voice and smile. We were delightfully surprised by his coming Thursday evening, for we had not expected him until today at the soonest; we were all so glad to see him; John was down at Mrs. Lidwell's with Mother, he delighted to see his brother "Widdy" it was quite dark in the parlour when they first came, but as soon as we went to the supper table John exclaimed "He has had his whiskers shaved off" Willie had his long hair cut in Shreveport, and his moustache shaved, and it does alter him a great
deal. He came through Homer on his way back, and saw Mrs. Barr's and Mrs. Bennett's family, they were quite well. It is so pleasant these nights, so gloomy out of doors, to gather our reunited home circle about the fire, we have such a feeling of tranquillity, of sympathy and security, it is like the magnetic circuit. My own private cares and troubles are not less, but I trust the example of "Agnes" in David Copperfield has done me good, to me there is nothing in life more worthy of striving for than a complete renunciation of self, nothing more beautiful than a steady, constant cheerfullness; my continually felt feebleness, the high and selfish passions constantly rising within me forbid me to hope that I shall ever attain this, but that it is beyond my reach does not make it less my duty, less my desire to endeavour to come as near my Saviour's example as he in his mercy shall permit to me. I do not think --I should be selfishly romantic and ridiculous if I were to think--that in my peaceful home life, surrounded by all these dear ones, I have any cares and sorrows to compare with those of millions of fellow creatures; it is only my undisciplined heart, only my too anxious desire that these dear children should improve and should love me, only my trouble and fear for my beloved country, that I pray God to help me to bear with cheerfulness as we all need his help in our little daily troubles as well as in our heavier trials. Oh how compassionate is he who in abundant love has numbered all the hairs of our heads!
        My little garden is at last all laid out and digged up, I wait now for Spring to bring her soft airs and robe it in gaiety and beauty. I received a note from Mrs. Morancy the other day, saying that her Mother would expect Miss Mary and Eva after the Christmas holidays; I am so glad
they can go, I hope and think they will improve there more than with me.
Wednesday, Nov. 23rd. 1864.
        I feel very sad and troubled, what I have long feared has come, I have been obliged to stop teaching Eva. I don't know whether I am right or wrong, that is, whether my proceeding will have a good effect or not; I don't see how I could do otherwise. There has not a day passed for the last week that she has not been insulting in her behaviour to me on no provocation at all, and it has tried me very much, yesterday I prayed as usual to be kept from my own passion and went into school determined to do right and if possible to avoid Eva's anger. At first I hoped I should succeed, but I soon found that she was out of temper about her geranium, which had nearly frozen the night before. I had gone up into the school room early in the morning while she was up there and had poured cold water around one, which I thought was the best thing to do, she showed nothing but good humour then, but soon after we commenced school she said the water would kill them; I said I had done what I thought best. Eva kept increasing her irritation more and more but I tried not to notice it, and said nothing; but when I came to hear her geography (I think it was) she flew into a violent passion and used very abusive language to me, I was so much agitated that I have quite forgot what it was. Loring had been troubling me that morning, and I was quite weary of this oft recurring abuse of me when I do all I can for them, I was very indignant and I told Eva I would not teach her any longer unless she would apologize for her behaviour and promise not to repeat it, she did this, but in an extremely reluctant and
sullen manner which increased the resentment I felt, all the rest of the morning she continued to annoy me in every possible manner. George too was violent and disobedient, this hurt me more than anything else, my feeling for him is tenderer than for any of the others, and his unkindness hurts me more, I was suffering from Eva's conduct, and when he spoke so, my self command gave way; I made some incoherent exclamation about how they troubled and burst into a passion of tears. I know this was not right nor proper but my passionate nature when it does burst forth is so violent. I recovered my self command before George finished his lesson, but when I came downstairs my eyes were yet reddened, and my face troubled. After dinner I could no longer command myself, I came off into my room and it seemed to me as if my heart would break, all my exertions seemed useless, all my prayers unanswered. After awhile I went back into the dining room, and thought my emotion unnoticed untill Mother asked me what was the matter, and if the children were troubling me. I said not more than usual, but she asked if it was Eva and I said yes, and added with tears that I didn't believe she cared anything for me. Father said I had better stop teaching the children; this hurt me worse than ever, it seemed a confirmation of my fears that I was doing them no good.
        I sat at work for some time without anything more being said. I was very busy making some gloves for Willie. I meant to ask Mother not to say anything to Eva about it, but before Father's going out had given me an opportunity (I did not like to speak before him) Eva came in and Mother told her she had better not go to school any more until she went to Homer if she could not behave herself properly. Eva has not spoken to me since,
nor I to her; I cannot bear to seem to beg for that affection to which I have forfeited no right, if I had done wrong I would ask her pardon, but I have not, I think. If I thought she desired it, I would make advances to her, but she seems so coldly sullen to me that I cannot do it, and yet it seems to me I am hard hearted and wrong to continue in coldness which I am far from feeling. If Eva would only love, but I don't think she does, I could not be more unkind to an enemy than she is to me. She does not know how it hurts me; I am afraid if she perseveres thus, I shall lose that love for her which I now feel.
        This is such a bright, beautiful day, the landscape is all bright and glittering in the cold sunlight, many of the trees have lost all their leaves since Monday, the weather cleared Sunday evening, and has been brightly cold ever since. This morning it froze in our room, my geranium is warmly covered, I have been afraid to open it lest the cold should get in, but I don't think it is frozen, our plants upstairs are only slightly hurt; the little tender heliotrope is killed.
        Jimmy Stone called to see us Sunday afternoon as he was on his way to Trenton with the regiment; he had had a hard trip to and from Alexandria; their horses were for five days without food or grazing, many died, Jimmy's two took the distemper and were perfect bags of bones. They had come up from Alexandria through all the mud and rain of last week with the horses in this condition. It seems an inexplicable move, this trip to Alexandria, they did not do a thing but ruin their horses. Jimmy says the soldiers are deserting terribly at Alexandria, there were fourteen shot in a week, this is appalling, many of them are the paroled Vicksburg prisoners who have been
spoilt by staying at home too long. Dr. Furness came over Sunday evening to bid us goodbye, was ordered down to Alexandria, left yesterday morning.
Monday, Nov. 28th. 1864.
        Willie left us again this morning for his command, which is now camped at Oak Ridge; he is now quite well and strong again and I hope so much that he will continue so; the dearest, kindest of brothers, we miss him so much.
        Saturday was my twentieth birthday, it seems so strange to think I am twenty, when I was a little girl I thought twenty was so old; as Willie was home and was going to leave so soon we asked Mary Stevens to spend the day with us, and Drs. Walton and Talbot to dine. Dr. Bluebecker is quite sick, Mary did not come but the Doctors did. Dr. Talbot has recently come to take charge of the hospital; he is quite handsome, not very large or manly looking, but slight, with a delicate complexion, clear forehead, dark, soft blue eyes and a beautiful, curling brown beard; he is so pleasant to look at that one can excuse his silence and coolness, especially as gives him an air of superior wisdom; maybe thats why he talks so little?
        The weather is now quite summerlike again; but alas, it has come too late for my poor dear geranium, the frost killed all the outer branches of it, and though the main stalk is living, I think it would be prettier to cut it down and let it sprout up again next Spring.
        Willie and I went to Church yesterday morning; the first time in my life I ever went to Church on horseback. I rode Willie's mare, Flora, coming home Willie proposed a gallop up the hill in front of the house. Oh, it was so delightful, such a strong, rapid motion, it will be a long
time before I enjoy such a one again.
        We heard Saturday of the reelection of Lincoln, it is true beyond a doubt. Oh, how could the Yankees be so lost to all self respect, and love of freedom as to reelect that man with a full knowledge of all his crimes against liberty and justice. Nothing remains for us now but to fight bravely, they have clearly shown that no regard for our rights or theirs will weigh against their mad infatuation for conquest. There is one consolation in this disappointment to me, that is that no one now can entertain the least lingering desire for reconstruction, no one at least who has any love or pride for his country; reunion with a people tamely taking to themselves the shameful domination of a Lincoln, no never.