Friday, March 4th. / 1864.
        Willie returned very unexpectedly last night, he had sent a note to me in the evening saying that he would not be able to come before his next trip on the boat, and that we must send Antony down with his clothes, but last night after supper we heard his well known whistle, and his "walk, walk" to Pompey. The government clerk in Monroe had received news that the Yankees were coming up to Harrisonburg, and that he must move the government stores from Monroe a few miles back in the country. Willie left
quite early this morning on this service, may be back tonight. I hope the Yankees will not come up as far as Monroe. Our troops will be obliged to retreat I suppose, there are so few of them, we hear something about an attack on Mobile by land and water simultaneously, but it is only a rumour.
        Dr. Furness came over last night, we were just finishing supper, and as Father and I had been playing chess, our nearly finished game was left on the stand. As I was putting the men away Dr. Furness naturally said something about playing chess and Father proposed we should take a game. I checkmated him, whether by his indulgence or not I don't know. Today is Miss Mary's sixteenth birthday and the children have begged a holiday, so I am free to follow my own devices. I finished the last volume of Cosmos yesterday, have been more than a year reading it, it has given me a great deal of pleasure and information though there are several parts which I cannot now understand, by reason of my imperfect knowledge, much that he says about magnetism was beyond my range, and about geology too, I mean pure geology, the names of the different kinds of rock and their classification; but there is one thing the book has done for me without doubt it has made me feel a sincere respect, admiration, and if I might so far presume, a love for its authour, the very name of Humboldt seem grand to me. Now that I have finished Cosmos, I shall read more in my french than I have lately done, and I hope soon to commence my Blair's rhetoric that has been tantalizing me on my shelf for so long, the study of language and of composition is delightful to me.
Wednesday, March 16th.
        I did not know till just now that it had been so long since I wrote here. I don't remember all the remarkable events that have taken place in that time, and shall not attempt to recount them. Mary Stevens and Miss Sarah Garrett made their long anticipated visit to me on Thursday. I was very glad to see them, and enjoyed the day very much, Mary took me quite by surprise by saying that I was to go home with her, however on considering that it was Thursday and that I should enjoy a visit to town very much, I concluded not to oppose her design, we had a delightful ride in, the evening was springlike, and I felt happy in the enjoyment of the ride and the blue sky and the bright air and the pleasant face opposite me. We called at Mrs. Seale's, found them all at home, and saw Mrs. Seale's flowers which are coming out beautifully. I spent a good deal of my time in town in visiting, had several calls to return; went with Mary to her french lesson one morning, and wished more than before that the teacher were nearer us, they have only four in the class and I like the mode of teaching very much. I learned one or two little things about the pronunciation in that short time I was under the influence of the light; at any rate, my resolution to continue improving myself was very much quickened. I went to see Mrs. Dortch the morning before I left town. I have not lately passed a pleasanter hour then the one spent in her bright room, she was so agreeable and so cordial. Miss Barnes too, I was glad to see. Mrs. Dortch's little Johnny is indeed a sweet little follow with his fair hair and skin and bright blue eyes.
        Played chess while I was in town with John Stevens, he don't know how
to play very well, but of the two games we played, he was victorious in one. Father came in for me Monday morning, called for me after dinner, but just as I was running across the hall to get ready, Miss Lou Hanna came to call on me, and she remained so long that it was not until quite dusk that we arrived at home; the place looked very pleasant in the moonlight, and the house seemed so large and homelike, I was glad to be at home again though my visit had been so very pleasant.
        I forgot to say that I went to church on Sunday, heard good and fervent sermon from Mr. McGuire, Mary's Grandfather; it is the first time I ever heard him preach, he was with as at Grandma Wadley's burial and I thought of that when I heard his voice in prayer, I could not restrain my tears when he prayed for "all our absent friends wherever they may be or whatever their situation," there was one in my thoughts as she ever is, where is she, where is she!
        On my return home I found a note waiting me from Mrs. Morancy, affectionate as her letters always are. I have some friends that I know love me very much and I return their affection, but I can always think of some friend they love better than me, with Valeria I "am esteemed and loved more than any other friend she has, or can have," she wrote me those words and I believe them as much as I believe that long before she told me that, she was my one friend.
        We commenced school again yesterday, all the children did well, and they have done so today too, except that I had a little bit of trouble about Loring's reading; he is now reading Abbott's history of Alexander, it is true there are a good many long words in it, but with a little help he can
get over them quite easily and I think the book much better for him than these little reading books we have, he was very much annoyed before school from the consequences of a fit of "disobligingness" he had, and when I called him to read, began to talk about how everybody was cross to him and how he would not be kind to him if I would always be encouraging sister May to be cross to him, and finally begun reading by jerking out each word in a slow, sullen tone which is peculiarly irritating, but after talking to him a little while and telling I should certainly speak to Mother if he did not improve in his manner of reading, he commenced and read five or six pages well and with great interest, his usual lesson is three pages, and when he had finished that I was about to close the book, what was my delighted surprise to hear that he wanted to read more, it was the story of Bucephalus and he was much interested. Speaking of Bucephalus reminds me that Willie has sold, or rather "swapped" his fine horse Caesar with Dr. Temple, he won't let the Dr. come near him. I was so much amused the morning after Willie sold him, Miss Mary and I were sitting in the parlour reading when them came a "Hello" at the door. Miss Mary went out and found a negroe boy with the petition, "please ma'am Dr. Temple says will Mr. Wadley please send a hand up there to help catch that horse Mars Willie sold him this morning." Dr. Temple had bought the horse, but he had not bought Antony.
        Willie has lost his pony, he went off the boat one night and before Willie could get out went off in a run, he thinks he will certainly get him again, I hope so, he is such a fine pony and so necessary to Willie now.
We have not seen Willie since early Thursday morning when he left for Columbia on the Twilight, we think it came up this morning and hope to see him tonight, it seems like so long since he was here. Dr. Furness was over last night, appeared quite pleasant, more so than I have ever seen him before, Miss Kate Brantley and her sister Mrs. Heard were here Thursday night, I was away and did not have the pleasure of seeing them. The weather is chilly and quite windy, like March, but all the oak tress are in bloom, the dogwood begins to look white on the hillside and the jessamine wreaths perfume the hollows, spring is near at hand. Yesterday I saw one of my heliotropes peeping up it's little green leaves in the garden.
Friday, March 19th. / '64.
        We were surprised yesterday evening by a visit from Dr. McDonough, we were all in the parlour, Father and I were engrossed in chess, Mother was knitting and Miss Mary playing and singing for the courier, who had asked to hear her, when the knock came. Mr. Haddox who was sitting next to the door, answered it. I thought I knew the voice but would not say so, I have been so often mistaken in voices and steps lately; we were all heartily glad to see the doctor, he looked jaded and ill, no wonder, had been riding a day and a night in the stage; he is going down to Delhi to settle up his business with Mr. Smith's wife. Mr. Smith has gone away to Vicksburg and is in the employment of the Yankee government. Dr. McDonough feels very badly about it, they were intimate friends. We kept the Dr. with us all night, he retired early on account of his headache and fatigue. Eva, Miss Mary and I were sitting alone in the parlour when we heard the galop of a
horse, we cried out "Willie has come," and ran to meet, sure enough it was he, he looked very well, but was troubled at not having found Pompey, is afraid he has lost him altogether. Willie is now performing the duties of clerk of the boat, (the steamboat "Twilight") in addition to his other work. I am sorry he has this last place, I am afraid it will not prove an elevating one. I am not afraid of Willie's taking any of the vices of gambling or drinking or smoking or anything else like this, he has a natural dislike to all, but the tone of his companions' mind and manners can scarcely fail of having some effect upon him; I love him so well, my dear kind brother! he left immediately after breakfast this morning, don't know when he can come back. The Yankee gunboats are in Red river, and the Twilight keeps her steam up ready to run up to Camillen if they approach nearer. We hear rumours of a threatened attack on Alexandria, and of a great victory gained by Lee over Butler in Virginia, but everything in uncertain.
Tuesday, March 22nd.
        We have such dreadful weather since I wrote last, it commenced on Saturday which was a dull, gloomy day and quite chilly, but Saturday night we had a most violent storm of wind and rain and the morning dawned cold and cloudy, growing more cloudy and cold as the day wore on, with occasional falls of rain, the night came on with a cold, slow rain, which increased to a storm. Monday it was very cold all day, and about dusk we were electrified by the sight of falling snow! this changed into a driving, sleety rain, but this morning when I rose from my bed, Rose, who was making my firs
said, "Look out of the windows, Miss Sarah, see how pretty it is." It was pretty indeed, but the cold beauty of winter, it was not yet light, and white patches of snow gleamed here and there down and up the hillsides, wherever a few boards or logs furnished a resting place, the roofs were all white, and by the glimmering twilight I could an the snow lay on the great arms and tiny twigs of the oaks, forming a contrast to the yellow blossoms which I knew were there though I could not see them. Snow on the 22nd. of March, I could scarcely believe it! As the morning light advanced the dogwoods and the snow vied with each other in whiteness, but the sun rose clear and brilliant to our glad vision so long wearied with clouds and darkness and the snow disappeared like frost work, the dripping from the roofs sounded like rain, it was so strange and pretty to see the clear, fast falling drops shining and changing in the sunlight, it is not warm yet, but is pleasanter than it has been for several days, once more we all say "Oh I hope this will be the last of the cold weather," I hope it so much. Bright, beautiful Spring when will you come again, how long will you sicken me with hope deferred, all winter I have sighed for Spring, but I am afraid we shall see her shorn of some of her many beauties when she comes at last, this alternately cold and warm weather is spoiling all the flowers, as well as fruits.
        Willie spent the night with us Saturday, was obliged to go to Fordsville on government business Sunday morning but came back to dinner.
        Father is making some gloves for himself, out of some very nice buckskin which he had dressed on the place. I think he will have a very comfortable, serviceable pair of gloves. I wanted to help him make them, and had intended to do so, but a most inconvenient rising came on my thimble
finger Saturday and I have not been able to sew any since.
        I have been making a pair of corsets lately which have taken a good deal of time and trouble, I cut them out from a pair of Mother's without ripping them up, and think they fit very well, taking this into consideration, they will fit very nicely indeed when I have made a little alteration which I contemplate.
        We have commenced reading Dickens' "Old Curiosity Shop" aloud. I like it very much but should like it better were the horrid, disgusting Quilp left out, or at least modified, are there really any such monsters in mind, heart, and person all combined? I hope not, I cannot believe there are. What a beautiful story is that of Little Nell and the Old man, so pathetic in it's simplicity; we have only read a little way in the book, have been so much interrupted, find it growing in interest as the different characters come on. I have another "story book" on hand now, two at a time is more than enough but this is a borrowed book and I have to take it now or not at all; it is "Say and Seal" by the author of "The wide, wide world," and written in much the same style, simple, quiet and religious throughout. I like it and think it does me good, though there amy be some faults in style and wording. I am sure the book shows throughout an earnest desire in the authouress or authouresses, to benefit her readers both for time and eternity, there are many books of which we cannot say as much.
Friday, March 25th. 1864.
        The evening of Good Friday, I spent the morning as usual in school, George and Loring both gave as some trouble, and tired me very much, the
dinner bell rang before we were through. I took no dinner, and after I had finished one or two things in the school room, came down here to spend two or three hours alone with my God. Oh how I feel my negligences and weaknesses, and how my trials sink into nothing before the solemn thoughts which this day brings up in my mind, yet I am not able to sustain my soul in her flights, my flesh so weak and my mind too. I have just been walking a little in the garden to rest myself but my head feels so weary.
        Mother and I went to spend the day at Mrs. Seale's yesterday, I did not want to go but Father wished it, the wind was high, and keen as a sharp sword and it blew directly in our faces, so that the ride was very disagreeable, but I was very glad we went for we saw Willie, he was just starting for Camden, we saw him only a few minutes, he looked so well and was so kind, expects to leave the boat at Camden and return by land. It is reported that the Yankees will be here before many days, but some think they will go to Shreveport, and leave Monroe unvisited. Was there ever such a dark period in a nation's history before, sometimes it seems that all is dark, all is east of the Mississippi, the soldiers are deserting by scores, the officers are most of them cowards or knaves and the people seem to have lost patriotism, even the shadow of patriotism; to be high in rank in this army is almost synonymous for high in corruptness, to the east of the Mississippi lies our only stay, our only hope. I hope all from there, but we hear nothing but vague rumours; I hope strongly, but the end seems afar off and in my darker hours I am tempted to believe it uncertain.
Sunday night. March 27th. 1864.
        The last hours of Easter Sunday are passing away, it has been a happy
one to me, the day was beautiful and all through the morning and evening too, the wind among the tree tops has seemed to be repeating in glad tones, "Christ is risen, Christ is risen," how can I be thankful enough for this unspeakable gift, "for the means of grace, and for the hope of Glory."
        After breakfast the children had gone down into the garden, I went there too for a few of the white violets that grow so plentifully near the little water course that runs at the foot of the hill, there I found Georgie and together we walked up to Grandma's grave, we sat down on the leaves, leaning against a tree, and listened to the continual anthem of the wind among the pines. My heart was filled with grateful happiness as I listened and as I felt the warm rays of the sun, the budding trees and shrubs looked high against the blue sky and the little birds twittered their sabbath songs from branch and twig. Loring and Eva saw us from the garden and came to join us, we sat there some time, talking of Christ and the resurrection, solemn but happy themes, as we walked slowly to the house we met Miss Mary and John, and stopped to gather some of the little "turkey berries" at the foot of the beech tree; their red colour delighted the little ones. My little bunch of violets had been increased by so many and various gifts that I had a pretty boquet when I reached home. The morning was spent in reading the service and the bibles, and in rest which fell into sleep for about quarter of an hour, I found myself refreshed by my little sleep and after dinner read a short sermon, then talked and read to the children and then we took our bible and prayer books up to Grandma's grave, where I read them the affecting story of Christ's judgement and crucifixion out of the Gospel of St. John, they learned some verses and then we took a very
pleasant walk, the sun was enveloped in clouds when we arrived at home and we sat in the hall all together until the cool wind sent us to the parlour. A story or two to George and a little reading followed and then the supper bell rang. I wish we might spend every Sunday as well as this one. I am tired though, and must put up my book which has now kept me longer than I expected when I began.
March 31st. Thursday.
        The month is going out in stormy wind an it came in, how it sighs and whistles round the house, just as it has done all day, blowing the sand and leaves in whirlwinds, it seems as if it must blight every bud and blossom, but in spite of it spring is now coming in earnest, the dogwoods are bleaching whiter and whiter every day and the beautiful and varied green of the young foliage brightens the hillside. Father and I took a ride yesterday evening, gathered some jessamines and I returned with my hands full of the graceful, fragrant wreaths. I love the yellow jessamine so much, I am rejoiced to see some tiny green buds coming out on those I planted in February; the buds are coming out on our few rose bushes too, and the violets are again blooming. If this cold, blustering wind will only cease with March, and make place for the gentle April showers, all will be well; I never saw a more disagreeable March, there have not been more than three calm days in the whole month. Today just after dinner I thought we were going to have a violent storm, the clouds gathered very darkly in the west and the wind swayed the tall pines like reeds, oh how beautiful the yellow oak tops and the fresh green of the gum trees looked against the dark
sky. I sat by my window, dividing my attention between the scene without and Lamartine's "Chute d'un Ange," after reading a longer time than before, I raised my eyes and was dazzled by the glory of the sunshine, the clouds were breaking away on every side, the blue sky shone in brilliant contrast with here and there a little fleecy cloud, I could not see the sun but his beam lay bright an the hillside and glanced upon the waving tree tops and lighted up the mass of dark cloud which still rested on the horizon, in a moment there flashed on my soul the beautiful words of Job, "And now ye cannot see the bright light that is in the clouds save the wind passeth and cleanseth them." I was so glad for those words then, for I was tired and disheartened, I had had such a bad time with Loring, had to take him in school after dinner, the first time since last summer.
        I am getting to be quite a milliner, if misfortunes should reduce me thus far, might set up a shop after a short apprenticeship. Father and I rode to Mrs. Wynne's Saturday evening, in the course of conversation she mentioned that she wanted me to fix over her little daughter's hat, wanted it turned down like Margaret Craig's, on hearing that it was Leghorn I thought I could do nothing with, but little Mattie's face turned so grave and her Mother had such a disappointed air as she said she must smooth out the ribbon and put it on again herself, I thought I would try and do what I could. I was at work on it nearly all of yesterday afternoon, for the ribbon required much smoothing and even washing, but after all it looks like quite a pretty little hat now. Mrs. Mays asked Mother the other day if she would come up and spend the day if I would show her how to sew her palmetto hat, that will be equivalent to doing it myself. I have read two or three lectures in my rhetoric, it so delightful to me.
I have been playing chess this evening and reading so long in the "Old Curiosity Shop" that my eyes are quite tired and I feel as if Richard Swiveller's 'balmy' could descend very gently on my heavy lids.