Friday June 5th / '63.
        Here is a beautiful little poem, a translation from the german, which Mrs. Morancy has lent me to copy--

                            Sweet earth that holds my brightest treasure
                            Be wept upon by gentle skies,
                            Blest grave that keeps the lovely thing
                            From her sweet dust let violets spring.
                            Dear winds that sweep the tiny bed
                            Breathe lulling music o'er her head.
                            Hush thy wild voice of fear great storm
                        Fright not the little sleeping form;
                            Beat not the turf to cause her pain
                            Weep quiet tears sweet summer rain.
                        Weave thou a fairy shroud dear snow
                        For the bright flower that sleeps below.
                            Drop richly here sweet sun, set bright
                            And dress my child in raiment light.
Green leaves make whisper o'er her rest
                            And soothe her dreams on earth's cold breast.
                            O! gentle water running near
                            Murmur sweet comfort to her ear,
                            Build here thy nest, oh sing dove mild!
                            Talk softly to my lonely child;
                            Dear dove make too a plaintive moan
                            For the sad Mother left alone.
                            Oh, white winged angels! softly bear
                            My darling up heaven's golden stair.
                            Dear Christ! who lovest the little child
                            Take to thyself my undefiled!
        I find many tastes and feelings in common with Mrs. Morancy, and like her very much, I feel so irresistably drawn towards her, I suppose it is because she has suffered so much, and from what I can judge has been strengthened and purified by suffering; nothing develops and enobles the heart and mind, like sorrow, received as from the hand of a tender Father not an avenging God. Sometimes I begin to faint in the course I have marked out for myself, I often feel afraid that I am not doing good to those to benefit whom is the aim of my life, I suffer much from the thought that in the end harm may result from my best endeavours. Loring told me the other day, in a passion, that I never could teach him anything and he often says that I am not doing him good but making him worse, scarcely a day passes that he or Eva does not get into a passion with me and say
things which cause me much pain; and yet I try in every possible way to make them love me and to persuade them to learn. How much need have we of faith and how true is it that it must be precept upon precept and line upon line, I could be perfectly patient if I were only sure of the end; often do I repeat to myself the texts "overcome evil with good," and "those that continue unto the end shall be saved." And there are some moments in which Loring and Eva repay me for all the pain they give, Lory especially has, I believe, begun to think lately of many things, his questions upon the bible both surprise and delight me, he never allows anything in our morning chapter to pass without explanation. George too is advancing, he knows all his letters and a few little words. I do not let him study in those dull a--b, abs and b--a bas, but have put him to read in a little book of monysyllables; my darling never refuses to come to say his lesson and though sometimes a little playful and unwilling to confine his attention to the book, he is never in a passion with me and a few words of commendation or reproof will quiet him immediately; my greatest fear for him is the want of truth; I cannot rely upon what he says, if it has at least a ground work of truth it is always exaggerated and many adventitious circumstances added to make up the picture. I am afraid I myself have fostered this disposition by encouraging him ever since he could speak until during a year past, to tell me stories which had no foundation whatever, but which he told so earnestly that he almost believed them; I thought that in acting thus I was cultivating his imagination, I succeeded it is true, but at the cost of truth, and I deeply regret the course I pursued.
        June is here at last, long looked for as it has been, but Father has
not come; Oh! when shall we see him! what would I not give to feel the touch of that hand again; six, almost seven months have past and we have not seen him. Oh! what events have occurred in that time, what a winter, I cannot bear to think of it, and yet it presses itself constantly upon me. It seems now that the next month is big with consequences to our nation, nay to the world; we hear that four Generals, Johnston and Bragg, and Rosencrans and Grant are concentrating large armies near Vicksburg, and we hear from the best and most direct sources that the Yankee dead lie in heaps about our entrenchments; it is horrible to relate, sickening to think, but so curious a fact that I must note it down, all the vultures have left this country, a carcass may lie for days untouched, those creatures have gone eastward in search of nobler game; how terrible is war!
        While such great and momentous scenes are enacted so near us, I feel hushed in awe and anxiously wait for the eventful future. God grant that we may be successful, I believe we are in the right, yet who can know the inscrutable designs of His in whose sight a thousand years are as one day and as a watch in the night when it is past. I am constantly occupied, occupation is life to me, and I find no lack of it, visiting or receiving visits occupys most of my evenings after five, and I am in the schoolroom from nine till dinner at one. Then generally a ride of an hour after breakfast is spent in riding, and though I rise at five I seldom leave my room until a few minutes before breakfast at seven, lately much of my time has been occupied in braiding and making a palmetto hat for Adam Young, his sister made one for Willie, and I thought it only right that I should
return the compliment, this I intend to finish this evening, and then I hope to have more time for reading. I have read so little since Father left and I had marked out so many books to finish before he returned. I commenced the "history of civilization" by Guisot the other day but have read very little. I have been intending to write this journal for many days but have never taken the time until now, I think sometimes I attempt to do so many things that they are all neglected.
Tuesday June 9th / '63.
        Miss Kate, Willie and I attended a fish fry on Crew lake yesterday, the party was very small, only Mrs. Willson's family, Mary Stevens, and Miss Sarah Garrett and Mrs. Proctor, with a few gentlemen; we rose at half past two, rode into town, and met the rest of the party at the cars at about five o'clock, we spent the morning very pleasantly in the woods, fishing, walking and talking, Mrs. Proctor afforded me a great deal of amusement, she is one of the gay widows whom one meets with so often in books; has a large bunch of small curls on each side of her face, and a net trimmed with bugles, waving behind, a complexion which is a happy mingling of brown and flushy red, a hooked nose, retreating forehead, and a wide mouth always open and showing very good teeth, her head dress yesterday was a black hat trimmed with blue ribbons, over which was thrown a black lace veil which never descended to cover her face; she has a nervously lively air, talks in a high key and shakes her curls, throws back her head, and laughs at almost every word spoken either by herself or another; her great affectation of youth ill accords with the number of wrinkles on
her face, and her general shriveled appearance; yet with all this ludicrous and disgusting appearance and manner she seems to be generally liked, so I suppose she must have some redeeming qualities. We took the cars at about four O'clock, and after a short ride of twelve miles reached Shonroc where bidding goodbye to our friends, we took the way home. I heaved a sigh of relief as we entered the enclosure and drove up through the grove, I felt perfectly exhausted by a day spent in the pursuit of pleasure, even though the object had been attained. This morning we commenced again our quiet routine though I felt little like it, I am better now though, do not feel so languid as when we commenced school. Loring accompanied us to the fish fry yesterday, and today he felt so tired and his eyes were so much inflamed from cinders that I did not take him into school. Eva has given me some trouble this morning, I was obliged to keep her in, though I disliked very such to do so, I wish she would take more interest in her studies, yet I never punish her for anything except ill behaviour. We heard yesterday that there had been a battle at Milliken's bend between part of Walker's brigade and a force of negroes mixed with a few Yankees, it is said that the Yankees at the first onset left their allies and fled but the negroes fought desperately, and would not give up until our men clubbed muskets upon them, we lost three hundred killed and wounded and it is said there were three thousand of the negroes killed; it is terrible to think of such a battle as this, white men and freemen fighting with their slaves, and to be killed by such a hand, the very soul revolts from it, Oh, may this be the last.
        Today I am to commence a regular system in the division of my time,
I find that I do not read any lately, my time is taken up with other things and with so such company constantly coming in and going out, so I have determined to set apart two hours every afternoon to reading, and not to break my rule except on an extraordinary occasion.
        We have had no rain yet, and need it dreadfully, the dust is stifling and if we do not have rain this week, our prospect for corn will be ruined; it is very warm now too, real summer weather such as I like if it only were not so dry.
Wednesday June 10th / '63.
        At length it has come, the long desired, welcome rain, all day long it has been alternately shower and sunshine, and just now it was raining, really raining, oh! how delightful, to sit in my room all alone with my book, hearing not a sound except the quick fall of the rain, and looking out upon the freshening landscape smiling through its misty veil. Bless God for the rain, the life giving, soul refreshing rain, and now though the drops fall more slowly clouds are over the sky and still "from cloud to cloud returns the solemn hymn," in the west a beautiful golden light shines through the trees and rises higher and higher in the sky. What a refreshing smell arising from the grateful earth as it eagerly drinks in the much needed rain. When looking on such a scene, and breathing such air, I unconsciously recall the scripture comparing the rain's coming to the thirsty earth with the mercy of God coming to the sinner's heart.
June 12th. Saturday.
        Oh! how shall I write the joyful event of this evening, Father has