Tuesday, Nov. 4th--
        A week ago today was Willie's twenty first birthday, he is now a man, my dearest brother, the companion of my childhood is a man. How strange it seems, I cannot think of his otherwise than as he has always
been to me, and yet his life of manhood is actually begun, how may a few years change him! I look with wonder on estranged families where sisters and brothers meet without recognizing each other, and it seems as if they never could have been children together, it seems to me as if I could never feel so to Willie. May God in mercy grant that he may never give no reason.
        Julia Compton and her sister Maggie spent yesterday with me, the day passed very pleasantly.
        We have a poor, sick soldier here, he came Monday, has two brothers with him; the poor man was not well when he left home, and has been in the hospital three months. He is a perfect skeleton, and could not walk up stairs, but is anxious to get home and would have started today, but it is threatening rain, and Mother thought he had better not go. They are of the poorer class of people, but are well clothed in complete suite of homespun, the two well ones have very heavy, dull intellects, they seem to be good people, but it is almost impossible to get them to say anything but yes and no. Mother says they are like all of the good country people are, very shy, especially among strangers.
        Oh how the wind blows, I think it will rain, I hope so, for the dust is suffocating and the turnirps need rain very much. What changes have taken place outdoors since a few days, the oaks are all brown, and the leaves of many trees are already falling, such a frost as we had in October is seldom seen here so early. But though the oaks are seared some of the other trees still preserve their bright red and yellow leaves and enliven the landscape.
        It is so dark now that I must stop writing.
Friday, Nov, 7th--
        Two of those men I mentioned are gone, but one, not the very sick one, is here still, he was taken sick the night before his brothers left, the doctor thinks he has typhoid fever, his name is George Woodard. It appears that he left his company without a furlough only to be absent one day, today an officer of his company came after him, but went away again finding that he was sick, he is going to send the sick man's brother to wait upon him.
        The officer who came today amused us all a great deal by his conversation, he said at dinner, speaking of camp fare "I used to think it was mighty hard living it I could not have just what I wanted, but now I would walk half a mile for that potatoe" then seeing us smile incredulously be continued "Yes, I would, and so would any of the boys if they tuk a notion for it". Poor soldiers! I am sorry for them. Oh! when will we have peace. We have heard nothing from Father since he left, though it is now more than three weeks, as the time for his coming draws nearer, I become more and more impatient to see him.
Tuesday, Nov. 11th
        Saturday morning we were very agreeably surprised by a visit from Mrs. Bennett and her daughter, they had been at Monroe and were going home that evening, so that they could not stay and dine with us. The young ladies are coming down soon, and promised to spend some time with me. We had just sat down to dinner when Emmeline came in to say that there was a carriage at the door, with what looked like a sick soldier in it. Mother told Willie to go and see, and tell him we had a sick man here and could take no one, after some minutes of impatience on our part we found that it was Mr. Murrah with two other gentlemen, we have
but a slight acquaintance with.Mr. Murrah as our only intercourse with him was one morning when Father invited him to breakfast with us, but he was then so easy and agreeable in conversation that we were all favourably impressed, with him, and were glad to have his company to dinner, the other two gentlemen were refugees from New Orleans, one had been away some time but was obliged to leave his family there as he could not get a passport for them to come away. The other gentleman had left New Orleans but a few days before, and gave us an interesting account of the proceedings there; he says one must depend upon Butler's caprice about getting a passport, but that generally one can be bought for five hundred dollars, though he has known a thousand to be given. He says those persons who take the oath are not allowed to leave the city except to go to the United States. He said that those negroe regiments the Yankees have are more trouble than use to them, they have to watch them closely to prevent their running back to their masters.
        This soldier is still sick here, the doctor came this morning, pronounces his disease camp fever, says he will probably recover soon. The soldier's brother came and spent the day and night with him Saturday, but his regiment was ordered off and he could not stay.
        It is very warm tonight, we are all hoping for rain, we are in great need of it. Willie left home yesterday to look up some pork, we expect him back tonight.
        We are reading Prescott's conquest of Mexico now, commenced it last week, we find it very entertaining.
Saturday, Nov, 15th--
        This morning we were most delightfully surprised on waking up to Father here, at least we all were surprised except Mother and
Willie, who knew when he came. Miss Mary and I jumped out of bed and dressed immediately though it was only a little past five and we could not see to tie our shoes. We saw the sun rise this morning, the sight was so beautiful that it seemed strange to me that I should content myself with seeing it only once or twice a year when I might see it every day. Father looks better than when he went away; he was obliged to go into Monroe this morning, as he leaves us Tuesday for Richmond.
        I cannot bear the thought of his being absent another week, perhaps longer.
        This poor soldier here is very ill indeed, his wife came this morning, he seems to know her, but cannot speak to her, lies and groans constantly, it is pitiful to hear him, one can hear him as soon as they approach the house and he sleeps very little; I have been with him all day today and must go up again now.
Monday, Nov. 17th--
        Our poor soldier died Saturday night, and was buried Sunday, his widow is still here but will probably leave tonight, poor woman, I am very sorry for her.
        Mr. Horne spent Sunday with us, he looks very well indeed.
        Last night we had rain all night and today it has been so damp that we could not have school. I have been very busy, however, reading French, mending gloves, marking socks, writing letters for Father to take with him and mending Eva's doll, it is one which she prized very highly, John broke it yesterday and she sorrowed deeply over it, but I think I can mend it.very well indeed with diamond cement.
        Father brought me such a beautiful present for my eighteenth birthday, I feel almost guilty to have such a present now but it was a perfect
surprise to me, I had no idea of receiving any present at all, much less such a beautiful one. It is a rosewood dressing case, handsomely inlaid with brass, and fitted up inside with purple velvet and silk and everything one could want for dressing and travelling.
        Father also brought home with him a beautifully bound copy of Humbolt's Cosmos, I anticipate great pleasure in reading, but fear I shall not yet be able to understand it.
Saturday, Nov. 22--
        Father left Tuesday, another month of waiting is before us now. The small pox is at the camps, several have died with it, we are anxious to have the children vaccinated, but cannot get any matter.
        At last they have commenced burning the brick kiln, it has now been burning two nights we have been out to see it each night, it has been beautiful starlight and we have had an excellent opportunity of observing the stars, the trees no longer interpose a leafy screen between us and the heavens, nearly all of them are bare now.
        This is a delightful day, the sky is perfectly blue and the air warm but bracing, as I sit here the perfumes of our heliotropes and geranium reaches me, and through through the open window I hear the low, sweet music of the pines, how calmly beautiful the scene; not the fresh, bright spirit of spring, it is true, nor the glowing luxury of summer, nor gayety of early autumn, but the beauty of winter, an indescribable, a peculiar beauty when the spirit is calmed the passions seem to die in looking out on the shining naked landscape. If I could only feel that my country was at peace what happiness would be mine; yet I know not I am ever prone to murmur; my wicked spirit must always have some trial to chasten it, let me bear it then without murmuring.
Sunday, Nov. 30th 1862--
        My eighteenth birthday has come and gone, I have now reached a period long looked forward for I am now a young lady. I do not feel the weight of my new dignity much, however. Yesterday I finished reading Paradise lost and commenced "Cosmos". What a sublime work Paradise lost is, and there are touches of exquisite beauty as well as grandeur, I closed the book with a clearer conception of the divine scheme of redemption, and a deeper love of Christ in my heart. I am anxious to read some in Cosmos before Father returns, but I do not have a great deal of time for reading.
        I received a letter from Miss Ginnie Calwell last week, she was on the eve of starting for N. Orleans, said Butler would allow ladies to go in and out now, and that a great many are going down to attend to their husband's business. She says anyone can bring goods out of the city by paying Butler, I want none of his goods and I should not trust myself to the whim of the brute Butler, as he is commonly called. What sanctity can the publisher of his proclamation accord to the name of woman.
        Mother has gone into Trenton this evening to see Mrs. Cauthorn, who was thought to be dying last week, and is still very ill indeed, she has a young baby, I hope she may be spared for her children's sake.
        We are having delightful weather now, this morning it was very damp but has cleared off now, and the wind is blowing the leaves in whirlpools around the yard. We have had no war news for some time.