Tuesday, June 4th.
        Willie is not well, he was taken with a very sore tongue Saturday afternoon, went to Dr. White, who gave him a wash and some pills, his a little tongue is a little better, but is still very painful indeed.
 The new carpenter has gone to work and our "shanty" seems in a fair way of building after all, Mother has undertaken to board the carpenter, he is a Yankee, but has been South five years and now classes himself with the Southerners.
        We had a delightful rain yesterday, it came just in time, for the gardens were quite dry and the roads very dusty. I am writing before breakfast having risen at half past five to be ready for the early breakfast which Mother has on the carpenter's account.
        The morning is delightful, everything looks so cheerful, gilded by the morning sunlight, the birds too are singing very sweetly.
        Afternoon--Mr. John Green has just left, he came to bid us goodbye his company leaves Saturday or Monday, Captain George Wardell.
        Father sent Mother a letter by Mr. Green, saying that there is a rumour that invasion is threatened on the North of Arkansas, and that if this rumour is true Willie must mount his horse, throw business to the winds and fly to defend our homes, and yet Willie is sick, my heart turns faint as I write it, his tongue is worse and he thinks ulcers are forming in his throat. Oh! if it should be the dreaded canker! Mother will take him to Monroe this evening to consult a doctor there. May God in his mercy avert this trial.
Saturday June 1st--
        Willie's tongue is much better, the improvement became perceptible yesterday. Last night we had a joyful surprise, Miss Mary and I were in our night dresses when Rose came into the room exclaiming "Miss Sarah and Miss Mary come and see your Pa" "I ain't fooling you he is come", hardly believing her we went into the room, and there sure enough was Father, I have not seen him yet this morning, and do not know what news he brings.
   Mother's drygoods from New Orleans came up the other day and we are all quite busy sewing. Miss Mary and I went to Mrs. Axley's yesterday to have some things fitted. Mr. Axley is still sick.
        The weather as may be expected in June, is warm; Thursday was a very oppressive day.
Home. June 19th /61--
        Once more I feel that I am justified in using the word "home", and though our home is very rude and very much crowded still a feeling of satisfaction comes over me when I think that for the first time in more than three years, our house and land, little as it is, is yet ours. But it has been a long time since I have written any, and I must briefly note the events which have occurred since "June the 8th". In the first place Willie has gone back to the mill, his tongue is apparrently well, but his voice is still very thick and the shape of his mouth is a little impaired.
        Father went to Vicksburg Sunday afternoon but returned Thursday morning, and then we commenced moving. Father slept up here Thursday and Friday nights, Friday after dinner I came up and spent the evening in arranging furniture and clothing and Saturday night Miss Mary, Eva. Lory and I slept here, Father of course remaining with us, and Willie sleeping at Mr. Bry's as a protection for Mother. We walked down to breakfast Sunday morning, and spent the day at Mr. Bry's; truly we were all glad of the rest which the Sabbath afforded. Father laid down the greater part of the day, and I was very tired.
        Sunday night we came up here to sleep, leaving Mother as before, Monday morning walked down to breakfast again and rode back on the wagon, in the afternoon Mother came up and Monday night for the first time we
all slept to together under the roof of our new home.
        It really would be amusing to a person not initiated into the customs of Southern country people to have seen how we lived, our house is a long low building divided at one end by a partition into two rooms, the end room, which is occupied by Mother, Father, George and the baby is about 17 feet square and has two windown and two doors; the room in which I am now writing is appropriated to Miss Mary, Eva. Lory and I, besides Rose, who sleeps on the floor, and George's puppy, who cannot bear the cold night air and is therefore obliged to be taken into our room. These are it's occupants during the night, it is our sitting room in the day, this room is about 32 feet long and has four windows and three doors, it has no ceiling but some planks are laid at irregular distances on the rafters in order that all unnecessary trunks and boxes my be piled upon them.
        For the sake of my amusement in some subsequent hour when we shall have exchanged our present residence for a more roomy one and when I may have become partially oblivious to our present state I subjoin an inventory of the furniture contained in this last mentioned room.
        There are two bedsteads, two wardrobes, three bureaus, one large chest, one grand piano, with stool, one couch, two washstands with towel horses, three large trunks and one small one, two kegs of nails, one rocking horse, one box of tools, one side saddle and a great many chairs, besides this there are numberless bandboxes, baskets and toys lodged on the tops of the two wardrobes, and on the boards overhead before spoken of. I count four trunks, three valises a box of sash, five pillows and one bolster a broken table and a frame for a couch musquetoe net, eleven book boxes and one chair, these pretty well fill up our room
not to mention a row of nails for dresses which are kindly overshadowed by a chintz curtain, another row for hats, caps, coats and bonnets, and still another for sundries; to fill up the picture it must be reccollected that the walls of our "home" are of rough, undressed weatherboarding without a ceiling, that the rafters and the posts of the house are of pine stripped of its bark, but otherwise undressed, and that neither windows nor doors have aught to close them but are merely openings in the wall. We have now curtains, but until Monday we had not even these.
        Besides the house I have described we have a kitchen which is set upon blocks and the boards nailed on about two inches apart, which gives it the appearance of a large birdcage, between the house and the kitchen connecting with both and walled like the latter there is a room which we use as a dining room and in which we keep the safes. We have as yet no storeroom nor stable, the mules and horses are kept at Mr. Bry's still, but will be removed with Uncle Jim to Willie's old camps tomorrow.
        We have not any well yet, but get our water from Dr. Young's; Sallie is still at Mr. Bry's and will not come up here until she finishes the weeks washing.
        Father a negroe man and a boy raking up the leaves, grubbing up the roots and cutting down the bushes in our yard, this is a very pretty place, though not as beautiful or as susceptible of improvement as the other hill upon which I hope Father will build a permanent residence.
        I rode down to Mr. Axley's with Father yesterday, I rode Railroad, at first I was rather afraid, as it has been nearly two years since I was on horseback before and Railroad is very tall, but I soon became quite easy and enjoyed the ride very much.
        Father went to Vicksburg yesterday afternoon, we expect him back
tonight. Mr. Axley did not come to his work this morning, he must be sick again. I hope he will soon, for we need his services very much.
        Ah! I am nearly on the last leaf of this old book, this book which has been my companion for almost two years, which has been with me from Louisiana to Canada and which has been the repository of many feelings both of joy and sorrow.
        I cannot close it without one brief sentence concerning my country, on Sunday we received the latest news, affairs in Virginia remain the same, both parties are concentrating their forces but there has been no fight beyond a few slight Skirmishes. But developments are being made in another direction, Missourri at last has spurned the yoke of the cowardly tyrant of the United States, her Governor has issued a proclamation for state troops to repel the Lincolnites, if Kentucky would but follow this noble example what might not the result be.
        But Mother calls me to walk with her, goodbye, dear journal, this is my last entry in this book and for the first time I feel how dear it has become to me
Home. Sunday, June 23rd /1861.--
        This is my first entry in my new journal book, the leaves are all fresh and fair, let me try to keep them unsullied by evil thoughts and the record of evil actions, yet to do this and still keep a faithful record my life must be pure, I would that one mighty effort might achieve this, then should I achieve it, but as this may not be, I must watch against the little trials which tempt me to daily sins.
        Our first Sunday at our new home has been past as usual alltogether; Willie stays here now, he has sold his interest in the mill to Mr. Pierce, and will stay there no more.
        This morning after breakfast Rose went over to Mrs. Young's to enquire if the Doctor had come, she brought word that he had not and that Carrie was sick in bed. Mother thought, I had better go and see Carrie, so Miss Mary and I went over, we found that it was only one of Rose's exaggerated messages and that Carrie was no worse than usual, only she had taken some medicine which weakened her and consequently she had not yet risen. We stayed nearly an hour but she did not come out, she has not been well since she returned home.
        I have been spending today very quietly trying to strengthen myself against the incursions of fretfulness and illtemper which so often cloud my horizon. I am often tried since we removed here, I can have no privacy or quiet and I have been so much indulged in both since my earliest years that they are almost necessary for my happiness, but I can only conquer myself this trial will be useful to me.
        It is very warm, the thermometer at 95°, every one of the family except me are lying on beds and couches or leaning back in rocking chairs with palm leave fans, trying to keep cool, the rays of the sun beam
down with intense heat, and when we go to the south door the air is like a blast from a furnace, to me there is something exciting in this intense heat.
Vicksburg, Tuesday June 25th /61--
        We, Father and I, left home yesterday afternoon, for this place. I have been dreading for a long time to have my teeth examined by a dentist lately one of them commenced to ache, I could no longer put off the evil day and so I came to Vicksburg with Father, we arrived here safely this morning.
        I have just come from Dr. Miles, have had four teeth filled and some tartar removed, it was not half as bad as I expected, being more tiresome than painful. Dr. Miles was so gentle and kind, that I suffered nothing from fear, the corners of my mouth are the greatest sufferers, they feel as if stretched out of all shape.
        I have been lying down to refresh me a little before the evening, we rose so early this morning that I felt a little dull, but am quite bright now.
        Mr. Green came in to see me after dinner, Father had business over the river and left me to entertain him alone, his visit was very pleasant indeed, he converses so easily that one cannot feel embarrassed in his company, he is very anxious to go to the war, and thinks he will go; said he would be back to see us tonight.
        I must dress for supper now, 'tis nearly dark; and Father must find me ready when he comes, he did not know the dinner hour, and came in so late that he had not time to eat his dinner.
Night--
        Mr. Green came to tea, has just left, he has decided to go to the wars, is elected Captain, but the company is not yet full;