Friday, Feb. 3rd. 1865.
        Oh it is such a beautiful, beautiful day, so warm and sunny with white clouds passing over the sun, and veiling the landscape in a dreamy light;
the birds are singing, the little chickens chirping about the yard, and the sunny air is full of insects. Yesterday and for four days before it rained slowly, steadily, until everything was dripping, the sky was as gloomy, the earth as disagreeable as were our prospects. Oh, that our national sun might thus shine forth. It is so hard to believe in the existence of Yankees and war when all around is so bright and beautiful. I can scarce bear to recapitulate the events of the past day or two, but I must begin.
        Wednesday, as for several days before, it rained and drizzled all day with occasional heavy showers, we were pursuing our usual avocations listlessly and wearily, and the day was darkening into evening when Mr. Gordon came up on his return from his expedition to Delhi. He was dressed in a complete suit of Yankee clothes, very ugly as they all are. He had not succeeded in getting anything except twenty eight yards of calico, and a little coffee. I was not sorry, for I did not desire to get anything from the Yankees nor through Mr. Gordon. He brought a package of Yankee papers full of the march through Georgia, and the unsuccessful attack upon Fort Fisher, they were gloriously repulsed, how sad that it was not an enduring repulse. Well, to my recital.
        Thursday morning were sitting quietly at breakfast, the pouring rain had degenerated into a slow drizzle, and it did not at all raise our spirits; I was suffering one of my sick days and felt hardly able to stand. We had been at the table but a short time when Emmeline came to say that some one wanted to see Father, he found that it was a messenger from the steward of the hospitals who had sent for Father to hook up his ox team immediately as
the Hospital was going to move. Father of course made a short answer to this insolent demand and came back to breakfast, the man went back to the hospital and returned very soon saying that if the order was not complied with, he would bring over a force and press it. This unwarrantable and impertinent proceeding was neither unexpected nor alarming and Father told then to bring over their force. In the mean time the wagon had been driven off to the woods. We learned from the second messenger that the Yankees were expected at Monroe and that was the cause of the sudden move. After finishing my breakfast I went up stairs with my pupils whom I with difficulty recalled from the lot; they being in a state of high excitement about the threatened impressment. We had not fairly commenced school when the force arrived, and at the first word of permission my pupils broke away down stairs. The men looked for and found the wagon, but to no purpose as the driver had loosed and driven off the oxen, they returned to the hospital and my pupils returned to their lessons. After the fuss was over Father and Mr. Gordon rode to town, a man who was driving some government cattle came in before they left to ask permission to put his cattle into one of our enclosures; he said that the Yankees were really coming to Monroe, and all the Quartermasters and Commissary stores were being brought out as fast as possible. Accordingly, we soon saw the road filled with government teams driving on through the rain, and sometimes sticking in the mud. I found it quite impossible to bring Loring to any degree of attention to his studies, however I continued to try. Georgie learned his first lessons quickly and well, and I soon dismissed him. Mr. Shields called by at about ten o'clock, he was on his way to Homer; had been up all night packing, and said he supposed
the Yankees were in Monroe as they were reported within four miles when he left. He left some account books with us, and took letters to Miss May and Eva and some books for them. Loring had not yet learned one of his lessons when he ran again greatly excited by a herd of cattle which had by mistake been turned into the yard, and were madly running to and fro as the negroes tried to get them out. Loring begged to be allowed to go and help and after that I found it impossible to get him in again, so I closed the school room and brought my palmetto plaiting down in the dining room. The day was miserably rainy, the ground was surcharged with water and it seemed to be oozing out at every pore, all was confusion, people coming and going and everything in disorder, the hours were unnoticed in the confused jumble, and I don't know what time it was when Mrs. Seale's negro man came out with her wagon loaded with meat; brought here for safe keeping; and bringing a note from Lucy saying that she would come out and stay with us while the Yankees were here if we would send in the ambulance, as she had no conveyance. The note further said that the Yankees had stopped at Grant's mill the night before, and robbed Mrs. Grant of everything she had. Our ambulance had gone to Texas to carry one of our servants, Mary, who wished to be with her husband who was at the iron works, so of course we had nothing to send. After a while things quieted down a little; Loring came in and read some in "Rosamond," and George was just beginning to read when a buggy drove up to the door. I came out and found Lucy, who had driven out with Adjutant McGuire; this is a young man who was at home (in Trenton) on furlough from Alexandria, and was of course obliged to leave on the approach
of the Yankees. After assisting Lucy out, and taking out her packages, he drove on to find an asylum further out in the country. He gave me a letter from Willie which I was very glad indeed to get. Lucy said she had a dreadful ride out, the roads were exceedingly muddy; at one place the horses plunged breast deep in the mire; it was raining all the time, sometimes fast, then slow. I was still miserably weak, but got a little excited after dinner by the insolent pertinacity of those Hospital people, who came over again for our yoke of oxen, which had not been driven off. I regard the conduct of the Doctors in this proceeding as in the highest degree ungentlemanly. Father might have had no objection to their taking his team, had they asked it properly, but he will never submit to unwarrantable impressments. As father was not at home we could of course do nothing, but the oxen were cut, and they were a long time trying to catch them; as we were talking about it, one of the children came in saying that there was a soldier out at the door; Mother went out,--soldier indeed! he deserved no such honourable name, it was Capt. Griffen, a renegade Georgian whom I mentioned in my journal last summer; an old schoolmate and intimate friend of Mother's in Savannah; he is now a Yankee cotton speculator, who has no motive but to get rich out of the war. I had never seen him before but at the mention of his name my choler rose, and I left the parlour in disgust before he dismounted. I had just been reading an account of the Yankee march through Georgia, and my feelings against them, always bitter, were raised to the highest pitch, I felt it impossible to meet one of their hated nation. After a few moments Father came up and went to drive off the hospital men, immediately afterwards Major Buchner and a certain Major O'Connor came up and were invited in by Capt. Griffin; this Major Buchner is a Southernor and a Confederate Officer but one would never think so
from his intimate consultations with these Yankees; this Major O'Connor it seems is a renegade from Natchez, formerly a rich planter, now like Captain Griffin, a Yankee cotton speculator. I have seldom been so angry nor I think so justly angry as at these visitors; I am never loud in my anger, but Mother saw it, and was, I think, displeased; she said I ought to treat with politeness those who were here in our home by Father's invitation; they were none here by Father's invitation except Captain Griffin, whom Father met on the road and casually asked as an old acquaintance, though he no more approves of his present course than I do, who hold him and his courses in abhorrence. Mother naturally feels inclined towards him, his parents and hers were close friends, and he was one of her childhoods companions; but I cannot even in consideration of her inclinations repress or conceal feelings which I consider it a principle to cherish. I avoided these honest men until evening, when Joe Seale and an acquaintance of his came up, they said the Yankees were in Monroe when they left. Mr. Lockett, the Post master from Trenton, came out about dark and asked to stay all night, of course he was promptly answered in the affirmative; glad to see some one to whom I could be polite, I lavished all my attentions on this honest little man, who has steadfastly kept his sandy whiskers and shrewdly twinkling eyes in his post office at Trenton through the viccissitudes of that fallen city. We were sitting in the parlour, the Yankee party were at dinner in the dining room, after a while Mother came in and was followed by Capt. Griffen, to whom she introduced me as her oldest daughter. I rose coldly but he put out his hand and, slightly hesitating, I accepted it. I cared not to disguise the feelings with which
I regarded, and withdrew to the window with my paper. How can I but hate the Yankees when they exulting over what they think the approaching downfall of our country; their papers are full of their boasts. Fort Fisher has fallen, one costly and extensive armada and army did indeed fail, but the Yankees have money, have men in abundance, they brought armada and army back, and after three days of constant bombarding, they stormed the Fort by sea and land, they were once driven back, our troops, our noble troops fought desperately hand to hand from one defence to another, but they were at last overpowered; yes! many a gallant Southerner fell there, and the Yankee flag now flouts the sky where ours used to wave. Fort Fisher is theirs, Savannah, New Orleans, Vicksburg are theirs, Hood is defeated, Lee threatened, and the Yankees exult; the Insurrection, they say, is about to collapse, our country is divided and the sentiments of the people, they say, are Union. A just Providence does now indeed punish us grievously, but we are not yet deserted, we are not yet fallen. Our day will came, our day of triumph I certainly believe will come; but should it never arrive, should we miserably fail because and only became we would not will our freedom, it matters not to me. I never will, I never can in thought or word submit to these detested enemies, or cease to wish to detest them. I do not fear them here, it matters not that they come to an insignificant place like Monroe, but it grieves me to the soul to think of Georgia thus desolated and of all our defeats in the east. We had a house full Thursday night, Captain Griffen, Major Buchner, Maj. O'Connor, Mr. Lockett, Joe Seale, and his young friend, and Lucy were all here. I came in the parlour after supper, but we all retired very early and I was glad as my head ached wearily.
        This morning Lucy was not dressed till quite late and we took our breakfast alone after all the rest had finished. Gradually they all dispersed, Capt. Griffen and his companion went into town; Maj. Buchner went away; in a few hours Lieut. Stubbs came in and stayed till after dinner, when he and Father went to Trenton to hear the news; Mr. Lockett also went in.
Saturday, Feb. 4th.
        Capt. Griffen came back yesterday evening about sunset, and Father and Lieut. Stubbs came soon after. They had not gone over the river as there were no flats. They said there were only about one hundred and eighty Yankees, or two hundred at most, who had ridden into town and out again without dismounting, they had not troubled anything in Monroe, but had taken all of Mrs. Mason's meat and had dinner at her house, they had no wagons, nothing except what they carried on their horses. Col. Harrison was in town when they came, narrowly escaped being captured, they chased him about a mile down the river but he and his companions were mounted on good horses and they bore them off safely.
        It is misting this morning, and I am afraid the sun will not shine all day. Capt. Griffen left soon after breakfast. Father and Lieut. Stubbs went to Monroe; left quite late. Lucy was very anxious to get home and was greatly relieved this morning when a negro boy brought a note from Adjutant McGuire saying that he was going to Trenton and would take Miss Lucy if she wished; she did wish, and said "Is it not kind in him to bring me out and take me in again." I answered "No, according to my idea, he is highly


favoured by your company; as for me, I think a young man highly favoured when I look at him." The Lieut. called for Lucy before she had finished her late breakfast. I hear the hospital horn, I had hoped they had left altogether, but they have all come back; the Quarter master's trains and all are coming back. I shall put up my book until Father returns, I do not feel at all like writing this morning.
Tuesday night. Feb. 7th.
        We were so joyfully surprised last night. It was the first night we had been without company since Wednesday, and after I had read two chapters in our "History of the Revolution" Lory went to bed and Father and Mother played backgammon. I took up a book and had read a little when I heard Willie's well known voice, it thrilled through me instantly, and exclaiming "It is Willie," I ran through the hall, followed by Mother and Father; by the time Willie reached the house Antony and four or five of the other negroes were around him, and Lory was out in his night-shirt; Oh we were all so glad! we brought him in in triumph. He had ridden nearly fifty miles that day; had come up to Col. McNeil with some guerilla prisoners, and then got leave to come and get his clothes; poor fellow! he needed them badly enough; his pants were quite ragged and his undershirt in strips, his coat was buttonless, and threadbare; his socks were "a sight" he had ridden all day through mud and sleety rain, and had stood guard for five nights previous, so he was quite tired, but we sat up quite late, he had had nothing to eat since morning, and of course supper was the first consideration,
then we had so many questions to ask, and he so much to tell. He looks very well indeed, and fleshy enough, but not so much so as I expected from Antony's account. He is in good spirits, full of the praises of Capt. Buchner and the Tensas cavalry; he says they have been doing considerable good down there in Tensas parish, and they are well supplied with everything. Says if the Tensas cavalry had been here they would have given the Yankees some fighting! what a fine thing is esprit du corps.
        I have been quite busy today lining his hat and then knitting a helmet or visor, which he says is very comfortable, and he needed one very much during the past severe weather. The clouds broke away last night at last, and today it has been clear and tolerably cold. I must go to bed now, am the only one up in the house. Willie retired very early on account of his extraordinary fatigue, and Father was quite tired having been busy all day making Willie a pair of spurs; he leaves Thursday. The joy of his coming has not worn away before we begin to dread his leaving.
Saturday, Feb. 11th.
        Willie left Thursday morning after a very early breakfast. I did not feel his first departure so much as this, I seemed to feel more that he was really a soldier and going to danger; but I could not wish him to stay home longer, and we had the pleasure of seeing him well supplied with all that a soldier needs. I am so truly thankful that he is strong and well, and cheerfully inclined to fulfil his duty. He is such a dear, kind brother; I was so happy while I could have him in my sight. It now seems almost like a dream that he has been home. Father went to Monroe with him, and
there he heard from Col. Harrison that the company is ordered up to Columbia.
        Willie took Prince with him, wanted Antony to stay with Flora about a month longer until the mud dried up a little in the swamp.----
        I left off my account of the Yankee raid last Saturday before we knew anything about it. The facts as I have been able to gather them are about these. There were somewhere about two thousand of them in all of whom a few only came to Monroe, they left in great haste on account, as is supposed, of an intercepted dispatch of Col. Harrison, from which they learned that Marmaduke's cavalry were in the vicinity. They committed few depredations about Monroe, we heard that they had taken all Mrs. Mason's meat and robbed Mrs. Willson of all her clothing, but neither report was true, they did not take anything from Mrs. Mason, and took from Mrs. Willson only three old blankets and broke some mantel ornaments and other china. They went to Mr. John Scarborough's and commanded him to climb up in his smoke house and take down a ham of meat, he answered them with a curse and said he would not do it to save their lives, they then acted in a very insolent manner and finally knocked him down with their guns. Mrs. Scarborough became so much exhasperted at their treatment of her husband that she struck one of the Yankees in the face; she supposes that they must have also struck her, as she afterwards found her arm very much bruised, but in the excitement of the broil neither she nor her husband knew it. It appears from Mr. Gordon's account that the people in his neighbourhood were struck with a panic, many of them moved from their houses, some into the swamp,
and others stayed in some cars on the railroad, running them as far down the track as they could. The people in Monroe were also exceedingly alarmed. Mr. Gordon says that the Yankees left a good deal of meat, and some blankets which they had taken, at the house of an old man in his vicinity, telling him to keep them until they came back, but those who had been robbed of these things were taking them back again. Willie said he heard of the Yankees insulting several ladies and burning a great deal of corn in Prairie Merouche, a place some fifteen or twenty miles back from Monroe and near Oak Ridge. They also destroyed the distillery of a whiskey maker somewhere about there; he had had all his whiskey rolled out into the woods, and his negroes and horses hid away, they made him tell where they were and opened all his whiskey barrells and took away his horses and negroes; but little sympathy is felt for him and the respectable portion of the community are heartily glad that the distillery is destroyed. But I must leave the Yankees now to note the course of our affairs since last Saturday morning.
        It rained at times through the whole day; when the darkness was beginning to come on Lieut. Picot rode up and asked if he and his friend Lieut. Flournoy could stay all night, they were running from the Yankees, for there was an alarm spread in Monroe Saturday that they were coming back, and it produced as much excitement as their actual coming had done. This Lieut. Picot is a member of the court martial now sitting at Monroe, and he stays at Judge Lemmy's. When Mrs. Lemmy was out here she talked of him a great deal, of how polite he was and how modest and agreeable. Of course being so favourably prepossessed with him, and the evening being so rainy, Mother took him and his friend in. Father and Lieut. Stubbs returned about
dark, and there was a Mr. Whyte here who lives in Trenton, and had charge of Maj. Buchner's wagons; so we had quite a house full again. This Lieut. Flournoy is a cousin of a Lieut. Lucian Flournoy who was at Monroe a year ago, and who was a great beau and favorite of the ladies, he was an old acquaintance of Dr. Young's family; I had met him several times and had heard of him a great deal. I liked this one quite well, he is a young married men, seemed very fond of his wife and child, and was quite social and agreeable, he manifested a feeling heart when speaking of the evils of war and the suffering of the soldiers. Poor fellow, he looked quite shabby, his pants were faded quite green, and his worn coat was closely buttoned up; he is not one of our bright gray coated officers, but this disposed me to like him. Lieut Picôt we found as Mrs. Lemmy had said, a modest, polite young man, he is a brother of a Capt. in Harrison's old regiment, who is very much respected; and he is a nephew of Mr. Faiz, of whom we heard so much from Mrs. Dwight. Lieut Picôt was acquainted with Mrs. Dwight.
        They remained here until Monday morning as the weather continued cold and rainy, and Lieut. Picôt was expecting a chill Sunday. He remained in bed all day however and kept it off. Lieut. Stubbs left Sunday morning, I had never seen him before he was out here this time, though I had seen and liked Mrs. Stubbs. I like him so much, he is quite handsome and has such an air of frankness and honesty with much good nature, he is very natural and agreeable in his manners and conversation, so that one readily feels at ease with him. He called again Wednesday evening to get his saddle bags which he had left here on Sunday.
        Capt. Reynolds called here Tuesday afternoon, was on his way from
Homer, where he had been to try and get a place for his son's wife. She lives near Alexandria, and the last time the Yankees were there they took all her jewelry and her's and her children's clothes, and threatened their lives, so that she is naturally anxious to get to a place of security. Capt. Reynolds looks very, very badly, he drinks to great excess and will, I am afraid, fall a victim to his intemperance. He spoke of Mrs. Veader's death as a loss only to those she left, a gain to her. He had recently heard from his son, who is first Lieut. in Capt. Williams' company of engineers, he was then commanding the company, Capt. Williams having been absent a week or two.
        We have had fine weather since Tuesday morning, but the roads are, of course, still very bad. Shuder bridge is washed away again, and the stage is not running. I wrote a long letter to Miss Mary and Eva yesterday, telling them of the late stirring events. Lieut. Stubbs promised to call for it this morning and take it as far as Minden, as he is going to Shreveport.
        Mr. Craig has had a petition for a detail going the rounds of the military authourities for some time, and last week it came back with "respectfully returned disapproved by Gen'l Smith," endorsed on the back; thus the hopes of his family were disappointed. He is a miller near here, and an industrious, honest and patriotic citizen, his family is very large and his wife a delicate woman, they are entirely dependent upon him for their support. Mother desired to make one more effort for him, and Father thought the appeal had better be made to Gov. Allen to exert his influence, so I wrote under their direction, and in Mrs. Craig's name, to Gov. Allen, enclosing the petition, and Lieut. Stubbs is to carry it. I hope it may prove
successful, as many a detail is made with far less foundation of equity and justice. Gov. Allen has shown himself so attentive to the welfare of the citizens, and so considerate of the needs of poor women, that we may reasonably hope for his favourable influence.
Wednesday, Feb. 15th.
        I have gained an hour this morning by getting up (by mistake) long before dawn; the sun is now just risen, it is a beautiful spring morning, the sky is so clear, the air so soft, and the birds sing so sweetly that we quite expect to see the trees in bud instead of quite bare, as they are; this weather is particularly delightful after the two or three weeks of cold and rain we have had.
        Mother has been quite sick ever since Saturday, her sickness, though it proceeded from nothing more than a boil on her nose, has kept her in bed for three days, the boil caused a great deal of pain over her whole face and head, and being accompanied by a very bad cold, it was no slight matter. Mother was much better yesterday, and will be up today, I hope.
        Mr. Noble, our old neighbour, was here Saturday night. He told us that the Yankees committed great depredations about Bastrop, they were very insulting to several ladies, but committed no actual violence upon them; Col. Benton told Mr. Noble that the Yankees stood over Mrs. Benton with a loaded whip and compelled her to unlock all her trunks and drawers, they tore up all her clothing, and when she at last escaped from them, she locked herself up in her room to preserve herself from violence, several parties came to her door that night, but did not get in. Mr. Noble says that none
of the people who had shown kindness to the guerillas were robbed at all, from which it is supposed that some of them must have been among the Yankees. Mr. Brinton came up late Sunday evening and remained all night, while we were at supper we were greatly surprised by the entrance of Mr. Barr, he left for Homer the next morning. I sent a letter to Miss Mary and Eva by him; he came up to Monroe with a Yankee prisoner, and obtained permission to go home for a few days. Father left with Mr. Brinton Monday morning for Millhaven; as Mother was sick we were very lonesome indeed. I never found Mr. Brinton more than endurable until Sunday night. He is very self conceited, and though he has been South ever since he was twenty, he has the manners and accent of a Yankee still, he is a great talker, and talks in a pompous, declamatory manner, not very agreeable; but I believe he is a staunch Southern son in his principles, and he manifested this in his conversation the other night which makes me like him very much. It is so refreshing to meet with a man of good sense who, while he sees and deprecates our misfortunes and errors yet believes that we will not be subjugated unless we will it, and that reconstruction is only a sophistry which means subjugation. There are many rumours now about peace, and many hopes; I do not feel that there is any prospect of an honourable peace, and can of course have no hopes however much I wish it. I feel perfectly safe to trust that President Davis will never betray the good or the honour of the Confederacy. They say that commissioners are passing between Washington and Richmond, and there are many rumours about that old delusion, recognition and intervention from England and France. We shall see.
        Father came home last night, I was rejoiced to see him, for I was afraid
he would not come until today.
        I received a letter from Miss Mary and Eva last night, they are well and contented; Miss Mary has commenced taking music lessons; says she thinks she has no talent for music but is determined to practice her finger ends off if need be, for Mother and I. They have had much bad weather, and they say have gone to school through cold and rain. I must put up this and go and see about breakfast as it is getting on toward eight o'clock.