Aug. 1st. / '63.
        Father left for Marshall this morning, went in a sort of jersey belonging to the railroad, and took Uncle Jim to drive him, we miss Father so much, and he will be gone two weeks. Had a pleasant rain today and this evening Tabitha Scarborough, Willie and I had a delightful ride, went up on the hill near Mrs. Compton's, the scene from there was beautiful, very beautiful and tranquil in the light of the setting sun.
August, Thursday 6th.
        I am alone this evening, all have gone down to Mrs. Barr's except Eva and John and they are in the garden. I feel very nervous this evening as if something were about to happen, or perhaps it is what has happened that
is influencing me. Last night I had a vision, I can call it nothing else, at least it was a dream, beautiful and as vivid as reality. It was about eight o'clock in the evening and we were up stairs in the hall, Miss Mary and I at the east windows, Mother at the west, suddenly Mother called us and we hurried to the window, I gazed in a thrill of awe and wonder at the sight before me, a few degrees above the belt of trees there shone a star, the size and brilliancy of Jupiter, but not him, because he was lower at that time, this beautiful star gradually yet quickly grew as large and round as the full moon, sparkling all over its surface at brilliant points like diamonds, while below it many other stars of the same shape and brilliancy but smaller, formed out of space and took before my astonished eyes the shape of the word "Nebraska" standing out clear and distinct against the dark blue, the letters perfectly formed as in print. I have never seen such a beautiful sight, such a wonderful heavenly vision. I gazed in rapture and in terrour it seemed to me I was beholding unfolded before me the destiny of my country, as I thus gazed the lower stars faded and were lost in the blue, the upper star grew fainter and fainter and at last looked as if shrouded in mist but soon it grew again brilliant, oh so brilliant and as before mysteriously, with a quickness astonishing and yet gradual, the word Massachusetts was formed, the spell of awe and wonder was broken by grief and disappointment as I saw this odious word shining in dazzling brilliancy before me. I sank my head in my hands and groaned and wept in agony and humiliation, it was a terrible agony, but soon a hand was laid upon my shoulder, I sprang up as the word "look" fell upon my ear, and there before me I saw still the brilliant stars but underneath the word
"epouvantee" (intimidated) by its glitter seemed to throw the light of the charnel of the hated Massachusetts. I uttered a cry of joy, of relief, I felt a load lifted from my heart, perfect peace was there instead of bitterness, oh the joy of that moment, new forms the stars took, familiar names, but the feeling of this agony and joy has obliterated the others in my mind, but at last the stars sunk and faded, none remained but the upper one, which took again its familiar form. But now a new and wondrous sight prepared itself, in the east arose a sun whose beams of crimson and gold and amber light shot high up the firmament, it was most glorious and only died away to make room for another smaller but not fainter. I drew in my breath for awe and delight, but at last these marvellous visions past away, it was near dawn, the whole yard was crowded with negroes gazing awestruck, but they began to disperse, a well known form drove up, it was that of Mr. Kern my Grandmother's pastor in Savannah, who has been since three years in "the silent land". Without speaking I put my arm in his and walking into the house, for I had descended from the hall, I spoke to him of the marvellous sight which he also had witnessed. I was still talking to him when Rose came to wake me; only half aroused I said Rose, did you see the stars last night, she said "no, ma'am" was it a dream, I thought, no, she could not have seen them, and yet it is strange. I said "I cannot get up yet, I have been up all night." I know not what she thought of my strange words. When I rose I walked to my shelf, took down my french dictionary and there found epouvantee to assure myself that it was a word and that I had not mistaken the signification, it is strange, for the word is very unfamiliar
to me and yet I was perfectly correct. Can it be that this is a vision, and this french word, it seems to mean something, we hear that France has recognized the Confederacy and has a fleet in the Mississippi, but I must not trust to these rumours and to confirm a dream. Yet this vision gives me new confidence, it seems to me that God has revealed to me that we will prevail through his mercy helping us, oh that this might be. It was so real to me, even now I can see the glorious dazzling vision of stars and suns, it has been prevent to me all day.
Thursday, Aug. 13th / '63.
        Since I wrote last I have been very busy, and have a great deal to write now though only a week has passed. Tuesday Miss Mary and I had been down to Mrs. Barr's, Mother had a headache and we returned a little after sunset, what was our surprise on entering her room to find Father sitting there, it was indeed a joyful surprise for we had not expected him before Friday at the earliest, he says he had quite an agreeable journey, he looks improved. I have been feeling very badly for the past week, for three days especially I have scarcely been able to sit up, I have a boil which pains me exceedingly, and have been half lying down all day, last night I had quite a nervous fever. But to my record--
        Mrs. Mays came up and spent the day with us Saturday. In the evening Willie and I and Eva took a delightful ride down to Mrs. Barr's. Tabitha Scarborough was to have gone with us, but Julia Willson came over and was hastily preparing to go to Kentucky to stay with her sister, we rode down
there to tell her goodbye, but I have since heard that she was not able to go. When we got down to Mrs. Barr's we found Mrs. Morancy sick with the diptheria, I was very sorry indeed, it rained while we were there, and we were obliged to accept Mrs. Barr's kindness and come home in her carriage. Mrs. Barr lent me "Following of Christ" by Thomas á Kempis. I never have read such a book, it is like rain upon a parched and thirsty soil. I never shall cease to thank her for its loan, the pleasure it has given me, the good it has done me I cannot estimate, I could read it always, as yet I am not half through. I have so much to do I do not get much time. I spend a half hour every morning in reading it, another with my bible and in prayer and meditation before the stillness of the morning has gone, and while I can watch the early sunbeams glancing on the tree tops and among the foliage before my window, it is the most blessed hour of the day to me. Monday Mrs. Phillips spent the day with us, there is a repellent influence between us that I cannot overcome. I had almost forgotten to say that Sunday a Soldier came here to get board for a day or two he had been sick and was still very weak. Mother took him, though not as a boarder, it is a thing we have never taken yet, and a soldier has never yet paid us for anything. This man's name is Lieut. Hargrove, though at first we thought him a private, he is a very good plain man, went into Monroe Tuesday to see the doctor, came back yesterday with a furlough and is going home this evening, he is improved very much in strength. Tuesday night we had a heavy rain, the thunder and lightning were sublime. Yesterday I spent the day at Mrs. Barr's, went down in the buggy with Father who was on his way to Monroe, had a delightful ride in the cool refreshing morning, everything
looked bright after the rain. I spent a very pleasant day though suffering very much from my boil and weakness. Miss Mary and Lory rode down in the afternoon and came home when Father and I did.
        I have another hat on hand, one for Mrs. Wynne's little boy, she asked me at Church one day if I would make one for him and she would pay me any price I asked! I told her if she would send me the palmetto I would him a present of the making, I commenced it Monday and am trying to finish it this week, though I have felt so ill that it is something of an effort. I have my hands full of work now. So many books to read. I finished "The Mill on the Floss," last week, returned it and Tabitha sent me Bayard Taylor's "Europe seen with knapsack and staff" and "Dr. Antonio." The first we are reading aloud, the second I have not yet commenced. Besides these I have Lamartine's works, and two little stories "Jacques Cour" and "Edouard de Tremont" from Mrs. McGuire. I have not commenced the two latter but have been revelling in the "Voyage in Orient" which I have half finished, I think it is beautiful. I am going to love Lamartine and to wish ardently that I had known him, his thoughts are so elevated, so pure, and there is a sentiment of such deep religion in everything he says, such deep pure sentiment as I had thought very few of the french poet philosophers ever felt, there is nothing more ennobling to men than this. I love poetry, and there is none more beautiful than the prose poetry of Lamartine in which he interprets the Holy land, it is true I could prefer it English, to me there is something far more noble in our stately English tongue than in the lighter, more profuse french. Oh shall I ever see these lands, I know not, and yet something seems to tell me I shall yet stand under the solemn
pine grove of Beirut, on the holy Lebanon's peaks, or more holy, more touching yet, I shall look upon Jerusalem, the holy city. Oh if I could but have the blessed privilege of treading with reverent feet the ground of Gethsemane, of weeping upon the Saviour's tomb. I cannot read Lamartine's touching burst of feeling at the holy sepulchre without tears, I feel with him so entirely. I have not time to write more, though on this theme I should never tire, but I must go to work. I must not forget that with me "passion too often mingles with zeal," this thought is from Thomas a Kempis. I have often felt it, never been able to express it.
        I found Mrs. Morancy much better yesterday, Jenny was not well.
Thursday, Aug. 20th.
        Just a week since my last entry, a week spent for the greater part in visiting. I consider this a duty as well as everything else, and a duty very difficult to perform well, at least I am too apt either to neglect it altogether, or else to neglect other things in consequence of it, today I have felt disinclined for any of my customary employments, partly from indolence, principally from an ill, weary feeling that oppresses me very much of late. Friday afternoon Mother, Father and I went into Monroe, Mother and I to pay some visits, just as I was putting on my hat the two Miss Grahams and Miss Hannah Bly drove up, they readily excused, we did not feel as if we could relinquish our visit when we were all ready and the carriage at the door, we went to Mrs. Calderwood's, found no one at home but Miss Laura Barnes who was on a visit there, and had a very pleasant hour or two with her, and some delicious pears and apples. We also went to see Mrs.
Jo. McGuire, the first time I had ever met her, a very pleasant lady, but small and very plain. Had a delightful drive home with the rich sunset before us; I never can drive westward without thinking of our future, which seems bound to this western land. Saturday we went up to Mrs. Compton's, saw the young ladies and Miss Stacy, it seemed pleasant and familiar to me to be there and yet that parlour brought up a quick sharp pang which I so often feel, I thought of one lost forever.
        I regretted while we sat in silence waiting for the young ladies, I truly regretted our pleasant familiar intercourse of last winter, now so suspended if not entirely broken. I don't think I have been in fault, though perhaps I have unconsciously given offence. John Davis came out Saturday to make arrangements for a journey to Miss. He said on his last journey he passed within a quarter of a mile of where Mr. Ridgill used to live, he heard they had moved, I suppose it is true for Miss Valeria told me in her last letter that they would go if Vicksburg fell. Oh unhappy Vicksburg, once our pride, now--
        I had just written a long letter a few days before but could not resist writing again to tell Valeria to direct my letters care of Mr. Boulineau, while writing I thought of a plan less foolish, than that of directing to Hazelhurst, it was to enclose my letter under cover to Miss Harrison, Summerfield, Ala. a friend of whom I have often heard Valeria speak, thinking perhaps she might know where they lived. I do long for a letter in that beloved handwriting once more. Oh how I am blessed in this dear friend, though parted from her I think of her as one not absent. John Davis took a chill here Saturday and remained till Monday morning, he will not leave
till next week. Monday I finished little Willie Wynne's hat, and carried it home in the evening, Mother and I went in the buggy, and Miss Mary and Loring accompanied us on horseback. I felt recompensed for my weariness in making the hat by the pleasure it gave the little family. Mrs. Wynne asked me what I charged for it! I answered in an embarrassed way that she was quite welcome, and something more of the sort, and she told me that if there was anything I wanted on that place just to send and get it. Tuesday morning I rode up to Mrs. Barr's, found her quite sick, poor lady, she seems pining gradually away. I earnestly hope she may not die, though to her worn and tired spirit it would be a relief, but it would be terrible to poor Mrs. Morancy. Tuesday evening Miss Mary and I went down to Mrs. Lidwell's, Eva was invited to a doll's wedding at Agnes Willson's, on our way home we called for her and I stopped and spent a few minutes pleasantly with Tabitha and Mrs. Scarborough while the carriage went to Mrs. Fithiol's for Mother. Wednesday I spent the day at Mrs. Graham's, to "make up" for leaving the young ladies the other evening. I spent a much pleasanter day than I had anticipated, there was a Miss Clark, a refugee from the swamp, spending a few days there, I did not see much of her as she had a chill and fever that day. I like Miss Melissa Graham quite well. But oh, we young ladies are all so surface like, so useless; I pray God I may be useful, only usefull, I feel that I can say with Evangeline often, "I have no wish nor desire but to follow meekly with reverent steps the footprints of my Redeemer," and yet how I fail oh so sadly, many are the vain desires that every now and then trouble this prevailing one, and my flesh is so weak, I am always failing. But I must go on; this evening I had expected to visit Miss Creath


who returned Monday, but the afternoon has been so dark and we have had such a cold drizzling rain that I could not go out in my organdie dress, my only dress fresh, so I put the visit off for more favourable weather, though I am disappointed. I wanted to finish my visiting this week and have the next quiet and undisturbed. Carrie Young was over here yesterday afternoon. Miss Mat Newcomb and her sister spent a few days with Carrie last week, were coming over here but their sister, Mrs. McClendon was thrown out of a buggy and seriously injured and they had to shorten their visit, we had a beautiful Cactus bloom Tuesday, I sent it over to Miss Mat, but she was gone. I must close this journal, I have a little time before dark, but must devote it to copying some lines Mrs. Morancy lent me a long time ago, and which have been waiting in my desk for a little leisure, they are in manuscript by Mrs. Warfield, authoress of "the household of Bouverie," and a cousin of Mrs. Morancy's.
Mary--aged sixteen.

                             The beautiful is vanished and returns not--
Schiller.


                             Again the pall is flung
                            Above the fair and young
                            Again the mourners of a stricken race
                            Come forth to mingle tears
                            O'er blighted hopes of years
                            That death has frozen in that marble face.
Again the bitter cry
                            Whose searching agony
                            So often to the throne of God has sped
                            Goes up from lips of woe
                            (As in time long ago)
                            Of Rachel mourning for her children dead.

                            How beautiful, how calm!
                            Palm folded unto palm
                            As in a happy sleep she lies at rest,
                            The dark hair braided low
                            Across her brow of snow
                            And blossoms heaped upon her virgin breast.

                            The features fair and fine
                            Fixed in that smile divine
                            Which rests like glory on the holy dead
                            Shall need but little change
                            To fit them for that strange
                            And lovely land where now her steps must tread.

                            Even while on earth she stayed
                            By glimpses was portrayed
                            The angel lingering in an earthly guise
                            Something too sad and deep
                            For girlhood's joy would sweep
                            Across her musing brow sad earnest eyes.
    The world was not her sphere
                            The chain that held her here
                            Was severed suddenly by love supreme
                            Thus we who darkly trust
                            With sorrowing brows in dust,
                            Must for the comfort of our anguish deem.

                            If solemn hope and prayer
                            If constancy and care
                            Had aught availed against the hand of fate
                            That beauteous form of clay
                            Might still have known the day
                            And walked before us in it's strength elate.

                            But He whose perfect ways
                            Our dim, unsteady gaze
                            "Darkly as in a glass" beholds with awe,
                            Hath called His angel back
                            From earth's untrodden track
                            To know the mystery of the living law.

                            From the fever and the strife,
                            The weary march of life,
                            "From the contagion of the world's slow stain"
                            From the quick and wild unrest
                            Joy waking in the breast
                            And from the wearing hand of age and pain.
   Our Father has removed
                            The being that we loved
                            Oh sorrowing Parents! to her home sublime,
                            To know a rest secure
                            A joy forever pure
                            A life untroubled by the change of time.

                            If from your earthly bower
                            You miss one lovely flower,
                            Behold! another star has lit the sky;
                            If by your mortal hearth
                            You miss one shape of earth
                            Another angel joins the host on high.
Beechmoor. July 21. Mrs. Elisha Warfield--
Oakland. Aug. 25th. 1863.
        About three quarters of an hour ago Willie, Miss Mary and I were sitting in our room, I reading, the others playing checkers, Eva was in bed with a slight fever, Father had retired and Mother was about to do so. At once I heard a man's step on the hall threshhold, then a quick walk through; the spurs clinking at every step, it was John Davis, come to bring the following note to Father "Col. Wm. M. Wadley; Dr. Sir, News just received at headquarters that a force estimated at 7000 have crossed the Macon, and that the advanced forces are crossing Boeuf river at Pt. Jefferson, 12 miles from Girard, and 24 from Monroe. Duvall saw the courier who said
our forces were firing on them. They are travelling rapidly. Send in for the office things I cannot leave. Jos. F. McGuire.------
        The first thing we did was to give Mr. Davis some supper. Father rose and dressed himself to go to Monroe, & Willie old Mr. Burke (the railroad overseer) went out to see about the team. Poor Eva was crying before but felt worse now. So quickly was everything done that they are all off now, Father and Mr. Davis in the buggy, Mr. Burke accompaning the wagon, on a mule. Willie remains with us, he is to sleep in Eva's room tonight, and has brought down his gun, we have otherwise done nothing except to count up the very little silver we have out. Willie and Miss Mary have resumed their interrupted game, and are playing while I write. We do not expect Father home until nearly morning. I cannot exactly describe my feelings, they are perfectly free from fear, I feel a sort of exhiliration, a firm and healthy pulsation the result of excitement but not agitation, it does not seem possible to me that the Yankees should come here and I should see them, a sight which I have hoped and prayed I might never witness. We took a ride to Mrs. Barr's this evening, Miss Mary and I; poor woman how she will feel when she hears this, her son and nephew were both absent, the latter at Alexandria, Mr. Barr went to Tensas parish with his wife a few days ago. I do so pity Mrs. Barr. We had a delightful ride home this evening, the clear, cold and brilliant western sky, the bracing air, like that of fall, the delightful motion of our horses, and the green swelling hills on each side, contributed to remove the load of sorrow from my heart awhile; Oh my beloved hills, how much longer shall I dwell among you, Oh my beautiful home! must the Yankees tread here on this soil that I so love? I cannot bear the thought. But
I do not fear them, have I not a Father in Heaven, he knows all that is best for me, he will take care of me, only whatever happens may I act as a Christian and a Southern patriot should act.
Wednesday morning, Aug. 26th.
        Eva is quite sick this morning, her fever lasted all night, the doctor has just left, did not think it anything serious; Emmeline has the diptheria but not at all badly, I hope she will get over it easily, we could not do without her now. Father returned about twelve o'clock last night, said everything was quiet in town and he heard nothing more; he went in immediately after breakfast, said he would try and be back to dinner, we are expecting to hear something when he arrives; he left this morning in a rather skeptical mood; but the doctor says that the Yankees really are coming, he saw Mr. Oliver, who was coming from town in haste and packing up to leave. We cannot go, our wagons are none of them ready, I say none, one may be but that is not enough to move us. It is as cold, perhaps colder, today than yesterday, a fire is quite comfortable though we have none, it is just like fall weather, so unseasonable that I am afraid it will produce a good deal of sickness. How strange that I can write upon such trifling subjects when maybe the Yankees are so near; but I feel perfectly calm, just as I always do when I think there is something great to happen or happening to me, a stillness, firmness and activity which I so often so generally lack.
Thursday, Aug. 27th.
        I do not know where or how to begin, all is movement, anxiety, expectation.
We are doubly troubled, Eva is very ill, I am writing in her room by the candle light. Her fever has never yet left her, yesterday evening she had an alarming nervous paroxism and another more violent about 11 o'clock at night, I sat up with her till 2, then Mother took my place, this morning, and all today she has been quite sensible, and has less fever this morning, but there has been a good deal of unavoidable noise which perhaps has had some effect in increasing her fever and nervousness tonight, she complains of excessive weakness, sleeps a great deal but not peacefully, takes all the medicine given her and is scarcely irritable at all. This is all so different from her usual manner when sick. We had a sad parting this evening from Mrs. Barr and her family; they have started for Texas in company with Major Waddell's family. They stayed with us last night and today until this evening about 5 o'clock; it was like parting with a near and dear relation to tell them goodbye, poor Mrs. Barr! her's has been a sorrowful lot, and she is so lovely, so ladylike and admirable, Mrs. Morancy too, her youth blighted, I could not but love her. Miss Julia is so useful to her Mother, she directs everything, arranges everything. Dr. Young's family left today. Oh, if we were only on our way, but it is impossible for us to go now. Father says if it were not for Eva he might attempt to go, but as it is we cannot stir. Willie wants to take away the negroes and stock, I don't know whether he will or not. Poor Father, he says that for the first time in his life he don't know what to do, he was in Monroe yesterday all the morning, seeing to the railroad things, and could not sleep last night from his thoughts.
        Prince, Emmeline's husband came to Father last night begging him to
buy him, Father has tried once or twice before but could not. Prince said a speculator offered his master 5000 dollars for him but he (Prince) told him flatly that he would not go with him, he was so anxious for Father to buy him, said "One reason I want to get away from Monro is because these black folks that come back say the Yankees takes all the young looking fellows and puts them in the army, and I've no notion of going in the army." Father went in this morning and bought him for four thousand dollars, I expect he will bring him out tonight. Father went away immediately after breakfast and returned to dinner, he went back soon after, and has not come yet, though it is eight o'clock, we are expecting him momently. I feel so tired tonight from my last night's vigil, I rose at six this morning, and have been standing or walking a great deal during the day, I have not slept at all; Mother is tired and I am afraid fatigue and anxiety will make her sick, since Mrs. Barr's family left, I feel as if we were alone, many of our acquaintances here will leave, so would we if we could. But it is not our family Father feels himself bound to attend to the railroad employees who all look up to him for advice, and protection as soon as the railroad is stopped they are all liable to the conscription, every one except Father, he tried to get General Smith to release them, he said would gladly do it but could not. Father would have gone to Richmond, thinking his influence might be sufficient, but for this raid or this invasion, whatever it is. Then there are all the railroad papers, money and negroes to be taken care of, besides the machinery, this last the government has taken in hand, an officer arrived this evening after the wagons had been unloaded, with an order that the machinery should go on immediately. Willie felt very badly this order coming in Father's absence, and he did not know what Father's
wishes would be, but there was no help, the officer was rude in his peremptoriness, and Willie ordered the teams to be gotten ready, the officer went went away but returned a little while before supper, he is still here waiting for Father's return. Willie and he are both taking a nap now, for Willie expects to be up all night with the wagons. Mr. Burke has been up for several nights and is very much fatigued. I commenced writing before supper but it is now some time since I rose from the table; Eva wakes every few minutes and requires my attention. Father is so late that we think what Mr. McGuire wrote us this evening is quite true, that is, that the Yankees were within five miles of Monroe. Poor Mrs. McGuire is not in state to be removed, oh how I pity all like her now. I hear the gate latch, perhaps it is Father. The clock is just ringing nine in it's clear, silvery tones, which I love so well.
Friday Aug. 28th.
        We have just finished dinner and I have resumed my watch by Eva's side, she is--as I was about to add--sleeping quietly, she waked, and I have been attending to her for some time, she is now sleeping again. She has been free from fever for four or five hours and has slept nearly all that time but complains of great weakness when she wakes, of course nothing else could be expected when her fever has not left her before since Tuesday night and she has taken little nourishment. Father did not return till ten last night, found the poor officer waiting for him, but all to no purpose for Father had the wagons (which were several miles on their way) turned back, said he could not allow them to go in that way. He confirmed what
the doctor said about the near approach of the yankees; the road has been full of soldiers and movers all day, this morning we had a dozen or more here for breakfast and three for dinner besides two sick ones now lying in the parlour, poor fellows, I pity them. Willie has been busy all day loading the wagons and preparing to start with the negroes and stock, we are to keep only the house servants, Alice, Sally, Emmeline and Prince and their children. I suppose Uncle Jim will stay too, and Rose, I forgot her, it seems such a matter of course that she should stay. It is cloudy and by turns rainy, has been so all day, the sun has just come out, how rapidly it is sinking, what may tomorrow bring? We hear that the Yankees entered Monroe last night, our authorities have burned the pontoon bridge over the Ouachita. Willie takes my little pet Mollie with him of course, I could not keep her here in danger though she would be a great solace to me and I shall miss her exceedingly. Willie thinks he will leave this evening, we are to send our "treasures" by him. Oh, how I shall hate to see him leave, my dear, good brother, he is so dear to me. I hardly know anything that is going on, I remain in here alone. Mother is very busy making necessary garments for some of the women, occasionally Father and Willie or some of the others come in, but it disturbs Eva very much to hear the least talking and we try to keep as still as possible, she has had no nervous paroxisms since Wednesday night. We are almost the only family left on the road. The Willson's and Richardson's and Goodrich's are all gone. I am in hopes we may be able to go before many weeks, we shall try to do so. Willie will have pleasant moonlight nights for travelling, I am glad of that. I must write no more now. Goodbye old book. I suppose I ought not to waste paper in journal writing, but it is a great comfort to me, and fortunately we have a good deal


of paper, thanks to Father's kind foresight. I found an old account book of Father's which I shall use after this.------
Private Journal.
Saturday, Aug. 29th. 1863. Oakland, La.
        About twelve o'clock this morning Mr. McCormick came out from Monroe and told us that the Yankees had gone, they came into Monroe about eleven o'clock yesterday morning and went away about seven this morning, taking with them a number of negroes, mules and some wagons. We had pickets out on the roads leading from Monroe, within a mile of this place, and though anybody was allowed to come out no one could go in, except by taking the bushes, this was the plan Mr. McCormick intended to pursue in returning, and Dr. Whyte was obliged to do the same. We were so glad to hear the welcome news, though we suspect that the retiring of the Yankees may be only a feint to draw our soldiers back and entrap them; but father says he thinks this was only a kind of recconnoissance, and that they will steam up the river this fall after making abundant preparations, I hope we may not be here then. I thought it would be terrible to leave home, but while the Yankees were so near I longed to go, I am so glad I did not see any of them. Father sent Prince for Willie today, to tell him to leave the negroes with Mr. Burke and come back with the carriage. We expect him tonight perhaps, he left about dusk last night, I never felt as I did when he left. Every thing seemed quiet, it was so this morning and is tonight, I felt an


aimlessness, it seemed as if we were so solitary like a great wall were around us separating us from the world, the whole neighbourhood seems deserted. Father gave all the negroes choice yesterday evening, told them they might go with Willie to a place of safety or they might bundle up their things and go to the Yankees, to take a free choice, they might have done so in reality, Father would not have hindered them, but they every one chose to go with Willie. Some were not sincere, for Mr. McCormick says that Mr. Duvall is sure he saw one of them, he thinks several, with the Yankees this morning when they left. I was passing through the hall yesterday morning and overheard one of the railroad negroes talking to Father, something was said about going to the Yankees, "No, Mars William," Abe said, "I come from Georgia and you did too and I calculate to die by you."
        Eva was better this morning, but has not slept any today and is worse this evening, she complains of great prostration, difficulty of breathing and a pain in her side, has very little fever, the doctor came after dinner, prescribed Quinine through the evening and night at short intervals, he said that if she was not better tomorrow she must have more medicine, poor child she has now been sick four days and nights, one side is so sore from the applications of plasters that she cannot lie on it. I have been with her all day until since I have been writing this, it is now so dark I must put up my writing. We have three soldiers for supper and a nights shelter, we can give them no bed but blankets. Mr. Taylor was taken sick this evening, I hope he may soon recover for his sake and ours, I am very anxious to have the wagons fitted up ready to move.----
Monday, August 31st.
        I believe it is decided at last, in two weeks, God willing, we are to start--not to Texas--to Georgia. Two weeks, only two weeks. That we are to go to Georgia takes not from the sting of this bitter parting for me. I have so many things to do in this short time that very little leisure will be left for writing, I am now taking a few minutes before breakfast. Eva was a great deal better yesterday and is this morning. I hope she may now gain a little, not go back and advance alternately as she has been doing. Mrs. Seale and Mrs. Putnam spent the day here yesterday, I saw but little of them as I was with Eva most of the time. Willie returned about eleven o'clock Saturday night, said he had gotten along very well, that the negroes were, as he expressed it, the jolliest set that ever travelled, picking the banjo and dancing every time they stopped, they will be still more jolly at the prospect of going to Georgia. Dr. Whyte told us of an outrage perpetrated by the Yankees on Bayou de Sicard, they went to Mr. Fithiol's house, demanded some gold that he had, and when he said that it was out of his power to got it, they put five pistols to his head, and commanded him to produce, he still denied, and they put a pistol to his wife's head, compelled her to get up, in her night dress, light the house all over, unlock all her trunks and show them throughout the house, when they still could not find the money they threatened to burn the house. Mrs. Fithiol drew aside the bed curtains and shoved them her children, "What!" she said, "Would you burn down the house over four little children" "Children are very common things nowadays, we see them every day" was the brutal reply. They did not burn the house however, but took
all his negro men but four and left him but four mules out of his twenty four. Notwithstanding this, I must do the Yankees the justice to say that their General (Stevenson) was polite (politic) and that few, if any, other such outrages were committed. It is hard for me to admit that they are polite.