Friday, August 2nd / 1861--
        Mother and Father went to Monroe yesterday to spend the day, Father did not return, but goes to Vicksburg this morning. Mr. Boulineau one of the officers on the Southern railroad wants Father to go over the road and give him some advice, now that Mr. Green has given up the charge, Mr. B. will fill his place, assisted by Father's advice and occasional superintendence.
        Mother attended the meeting of the Monroe Aid Society yesterday, she says that they had no work, but did a good deal of talking and writing, Mother says I must be more particular about my "minutes" I did not think it necessary to put down anything about our last meeting but I shall do so now.
        Just after dinner yesterday an old lady and her son came to see us, Miss Mary and I were sitting in this front room when they came, and we could not imagine who they were, Willie soon came in and addressed the lady as Mrs. Brantley, she is one from whom Willie hired seven negroes when he went to work, she is a very nice old lady, she spent all the evening here, and also remained during the night.
        Miss Mary has been busy making a curtain to hang up in our room in case Mr. Robt. Green should come to stay all night; we expected him a little last night and had the curtain all ready, he did not come, but we had use for the curtain; there was a mistake about the beds, (Mrs.
Brantley getting into ours) and Miss Mary and I had to sleep on the floor, we only had one moss mattress and our bed was as hard as a board, I could not sleep for a long time and this morning my neck and shoulders were very lame.
        Mrs. Brantley has fifteen children, she has three sons, two sons-inlaw and one grandson in our army, she came down to try to get a little money from Father, she said one of her sons had returned home on account of sickness and was now going back again and she wanted to give him some money and send some to his brothers, she said that if she could only get a hundred dollars that she would be satisfied. We were very sorry that Father was not at home, if he had been he would have strained every nerve to have paid her under such circumstances, but we had no money in the house and Father was not here; Father does not draw any salary now, the road is so pressed for money, and he is very much straitened; Mrs. Brantley says that around in her neighborhood every one has given almost their last cent of ready money to the war cause.
        I called on Miss Julia Wilson Monday evening, found her at home, she was very pleasant, her Mother calls her wild, and some others have said the same, but she appeared only animated and pleasing, her demeanor was lady like and correct.
        Mr. Hodge Adams and family left on Tuesday, Mother went down to bid them goodbye. This is such a warm day, the thermometer stands at 96° in the shade, it has been warm all day, but the heat is more intense now, at one o'clock, I have taken off my dress and am sitting with a thin apron over my shoulders; I did not till so late last night and rose so early this morning that I feel quite badly, I have done nothing today, except to write this journal and wipe off the perspiration, the sun


beams down intensely hot and scarce a leaf is stirring.
        Mother, Miss Mary and I went over to Mrs. Marks this morning and spent an hour or two, Mrs. Marks is quilting a silk quilt, she showed it to us, it is very pretty indeed. It reminded me of Miss Valeria, when we were down there she showed us a quilt which she had begun, hers was made in little circles, each circle being composed of pieces which some friend had given her, in the centre was a white piece, with the donor's name written on it. Mrs. Marks looked very well today she bears her husbands absence with fortitude, maintaining sober cheerfulness all the time.
        In Mrs. Marks manners I think she resembles Miss Valeria somewhat, they are both quiet and self possessed but converse easily and intelligently. Mrs. Marks is not so intellectual as Miss Valeria, nor is she quite so pleasant in conversation, that is to me, as is Miss Valeria.
        Father made a windless to our well Saturday and we drink that water now, it is not so clear or so pleasant to the taste as Dr. Young's well water but tastes very well.
        Mr. Axley to sick, has not worked any this week. Father has had all the sills hauled for our house, and Mr. Axley had just finished the outbuildings and was going to work on the house when he was taken sick; the summer is slipping away fast now, there are only two months more untill cold weather commences, and I am very much afraid the house will not be finished far enough for us to move into it in the winter; it seems almost impossible for us to live here in cold weather.
        Willie has not had another chill but is very weak, he is very low-spirited too, he wants to go to the war and does not feel able to go; Father is very anxious that he should go at all hazards.
        Rose had a dumb chill Tuesday and another yesterday, she is up today,
but looks badly, Mother has given her medicine.
Wednesday, August 7th--
        I did not intend to put off writing so long but have almost unconsciously deferred it from day to day.
        Father returned home very unexpectedly to us all Friday night, Mother sent Uncle Jim to Monroe that night to get some butter and when he came back he brought word that Pa would be home on the stage. Pa said that he was not wanted in Vicksburg, and so he came home.
        Sunday night Lieutenant Hervey came out to the gate about two o'clock and called for his buggy, Father answered him that the owner of the buggy had come and taken it, the Lieutenant then said that he had gotten off the stage and was now in the open road with a lady, Father told him that we could not take him in, that our shanty was "filled to overflowing" but that he could probably get a shelter over at Dr. Young's, the man went away and (according to his version) when he had gotten down opposite, our house the lady fell down in a faint, he built a fire, and as the night was dry concluded to wait there until morning. Mother got up to attend to Rosa who was sick in the room and seeing the bright light she imagined that it was Lieutenant Hervey and thinking that Dr. Young might have refused him admittance, she felt sorry for the lady and sent down to the fence to say to them that if they would come up she would give them all that she could in the shape of lodging, the servant returned and said that they were not there. Lieutenant Hervey says that the servant did not go to the fire at all. In the morning Father was going into Monroe with the carriage, (to bring Mr. Green out) and Mother sent over to invite the Lieutenant and the lady to go in with him, soon after breakfast the Lieutenant came over, he said that he had had great
trouble about getting together his recruits and was very much fatigued, he said that the lady was going on to Richmond with him, that she was his cousin and in very delicate health having just recovered from a severe illness; he promised to send Mother the Richmond papers when he had arrived and left with many thanks for Mother's kindness. Before I dismiss this subject I must say (though not in regular order) that Mr. Robt. Green says that Lieutenant Hervey has never been to Richmond! that he has passed over the road several times from Camp Moore but never from Richmond, and that the last time he passed he had a Lieutenant's commission.
        Monday afternoon, Mrs. Noble, Mrs. Marks, Mrs. Wilson and Miss Scarborough, Mrs. Wilson's niece, all came to see us, Miss Wilson was too sick to come out.
        Monday night about half past ten or eleven o'clock Father and Mr. Green came; I had been feeling badly all day and went to bed very early, knowing that if I did not I should not be able to sit up on the morrow. Tuesday Mr. Green spent the day with us, it was very pleasant and I enjoyed his company an much as any one could who was only half able to sit up. Mr. Green is really an admirable man and one whom it would be a pleasure and a privilege to know intimately; there appears to be but one defective point in his character the want of earnest religion, this alas is a want which too many of us have to deplore; neither strictly moral life or a poetical conception of Deity can supply the deficiency.
        Mr. Green expects to leave for Virginia tomorrow, he may be dissappointed but will almost certainly leave next week; he says that he does not go from a desire to appear courageous and to be shot at that he may win honourable scars, but because he feels deeply that it is his duty to go and he will not fail in this duty. His company are now called
Vicksburg Confederates.
        We had a delightful rain yesterday afternoon, it commenced at three o'clock and rained on steadily until nearly sunset. I was so glad, and yet I partly regretted that it rained so long, because Father and Mr. Green had to go to Monroe in the rain. Father went on to Vicksburg too, we expect him to return tomorrow night.
        Rose is very sick, Mother sent for the Doctor (Dr. White) Monday evening he pronounced her sickness inflammation of the bowels, has been attending on her ever since, she is no better, but her case is not one of the worst.
        This has been a delightful morning, everything looks so green and fresh and the air is deliciously pure and cool.
        Mr. Pierce spent the day with us Sunday, he is looking very well.
Thursday, August 8th/--
        This is our society day, of course I was present, Miss Mary joined-- Mother did not go, she could not leave Rose, and as she had been sitting up to give medicine until twelve o'clock for several nights she was very much fatigued.
        I was very pleasantly surprised to see Mrs. Young of Trenton, my acquaintance of the cars, at the meetings she met me very cordially, she expected to remain in Virginia all summer, but when the militia was all called out, her husband thought it dangerous for her to remain and she returned with Mr. Oliver, not, however, until her husband promised her to come home the last of this month, but after she had come back she received a letter from him saying that he could not come home for there was so much sickness among the soldiers that he was needed there.
        They say that Dr. Young loved another young lady but she jilted him and
he then married his wife out of pique, it is also said that he neglects. I am very sorry if this is true, Mrs. Young seems devotedly attached to her husband, speaks of him with great fondness; she is a very pleasant lady; is boarding at Mr. Oliver's this summer, said that I had been so kind to her in going to Vicksburg and during her brief stay there that she wished to continue our acquaintance and would come to see me soon, I hope she will; she joined the society today.
        We have no work as yet, will probably have some at the next meeting; Mrs. Gainey gave us ten dollars today and also brought four pair of socks, Mrs. Friend sent twelve pair of socks.
        Mother received a letter last night from Miss Stewart, she showed me the back of it this morning and asked me if I could guess who it was from. I could not, and she told me, I was never more perfectly surprised I had given up all idea of hearing from her again, she says in her letter that she answered Mother's letter saying that if we could make her only tolerably comfortable she would accept or the situation; but she directed her letter "Lynhurst" and consequently we never received it; she is now teaching in Vicksburg but her engagement will expire in September and she is then willing to come to us, that is if we have not filled the place. Mother is going to open negotiations immediately; oh! I do hope that she will prove to be a superior teacher and that we will be able to engage her, I must learn something soon I am fast approaching young lady hood and I am very ignorant.
        Father has just come, we have been sitting up for him, I must now retire.
Friday, Aug 9th.
        Mrs. C. G. Young and Carrie came over yesterday evening. Mrs. Nobles
and her daughter Anna also came in. Mrs. Nobles says that Miss Julia Wilson has been quite sick with the fever.
        Since the rain we have had very cool evenings and mornings, but at noonday it is quite warm, while I write (2 o'clock) the thermometer is a 97°. This morning when I went to ride this morning it was delightful, the fresh, cool air swept through the woods with that swift rustle which always reminds me of Autumn.
Saturday, Aug. 10th /
        I have just found the following beautiful poem in the Monroe Intelligencer, as the paper is Dr. Young's and I cannot cut it out I copy it here.
Rock me to sleep.


                             Backward, turn backward, Oh Time! in your flight
                            Make me a child again--just for tonight!
                            Mother, come back from the echoeless shore,
                            Take me again to your heart as of yore;
                            Kiss from my forehead the furrow of care,
                            Smooth the few silver threads out of my hairs
                            Over my slumbers your loving watch keep
                            Rock me to sleep, Mother, rock me to sleep!

                            Backward, flow backward, O swift tide of years!
                            I am weary of toil, I am weary of tears:
                            Toil without recompense, tears all in vain,
                            Take them and give me my childhood again!
                            I have grown weary of dust and decay,
                            Weary of throwing my soul-wealth away,
                            Weary of sowing for others to reap
                            Rock me to sleep, Mother, rock me to sleep!


                             Over my heart in the days that are flown,
                            No love like Mother-love ever was thrown:
                            No other worship abides and endures,
                            Faithful, unselfish and patient like yours;
                            None like a Mother can charm away pain
                            From the sorrowing soul, and world-weary brain;
                            Slumber's soft calm o'er my heavey lids creep--
                            Rock me to sleep, Mother,--rock me to sleep!

                            Tired of the hollow--, the base, the untrue:
                            Mother, O Mother! my heart calls for you!
                            Many a summer the grass has grown green,
                            Blossomed and faded, our faces between,
                            Yet with strong yearning and passionate pain
                            Long I tonight for your presence again;
                            Come from the silence so long and so deep--
                            Rock me to sleep, Mother--rock me to sleep!

                            Come, let your brown hair, just lighted with gold
                            Fall on my shoulders again as of old
                            Let it fall o'er my forehead tonight,
                            Shielding my eyes from the flickering light--
                            For oh! I with it's sunny-edged shadows once more,
                            Happily will throng the sweet visions of yore:
                            Lovingly, softly, it's bright billows sweep--
                            Rock me to sleep, Mother--rock me to sleep!

                            Mother, dear Mother, the years have been long
                            Since last I was hushed by your lullaby song;
Sing, then, again!--to my soul it shall seem
                            Womanhood's years have been only a dream;
                            Clasped to by your arms in a loving embrace
                            With your soft light lashes just swooping my face:
                            Never hereafter to wake or to weep--
                            Rock me to sleep, Mother--rock me to sleep!
Sunday, August 11th / 61--
        We could not go to Sunday School this morning, it rained from daylight to nine or ten o'clock, it was quite a dissappointment but I have been able to pass the morning as profitably as I would have done at school.
        Miss Mary had another chill this morning, she was perfectly discouraged, had not any control over her feelings but exclaimed that she should die if she remained here during the summer, she had a slight dumb chill day before yesterday, and was imprudent in leaving her bed this morning, she has almost recovered from the effects of the chill now and is talking and laughing in the other room, though she is still in bed. Rose is much better, has sat up for some time today.
        Sylvia had a child born yesterday, a boy.
        It is quite warm today in spite of the rain. I do not think it can have cleared off yet.
        I think I am passing, I might say have passed, through an ordeal lately, the ordeal of selfdenial in the greatest of luxuries to me, This is occasional privacy and quiet. I used to think when we first came here that it would be almost impossible for me to live as we have lived in constant society with one another and almost constant noise.
I hope I do not speak presumptuously or irreverrently when I say that strength has been given me from above to bear this trial, unusual mental peace and thankfulness and faith have blessed my endeavours after patience, and I now rarely or never feel inclined to murmur, it has been a great blessing to me in teaching me self-control in little things, self-control in great things I learned before, but have never been sufficiently watchful over the "little foxes"; yet let me not exult before the day of trial is passed, let me bear in mind the apostolic injunction "Be not highminded but fear", to be constantly fearful of sin is the only way to guard against it.
Friday, Aug. 16th/ 1861--
        The days have passed in their usual routine all the week. Father left us for Vicksburg Monday but returned Wednesday night. Miss Mary has had two chills this week, one Tuesday and one yesterday, she is very weak today, looked almost as badly as she did after her first attack. We have had very cool weather this week, yesterday was a delightful day, Father and I went to Monroe yesterday. Miss Puss and Miss Hannah Bry went with us, we went in to attend the meeting of the Monroe society, we went to Mrs. Roane's and asked her to accompany us and then repaired to the meeting, where we remained until one o'clock, we then returned to Mrs. Roane's and spent the rest of the day there, we did not come home until after the cars arrived, so that we had a moonlight ride, the day was very pleasant indeed.
        Mr. Robt. Green and his company leave for Virginia today, The employees of the Southern road presented Mr. Green with a very handsome sword before he left.
        Father is at home today, he is having the sills of the house placed, the house will occupy much more room than I at first thought, it takes up almost the whole of our little hill.
Wednesday, August 21st/61--
        So quietly do the days pass that the record of one may almost suffice for that of another. Father left, for Vicksburg Monday, we expect him back tonight.
        We have all been picking lint this week, and have filled two good-sized boxes; Miss Mary and I went over to Mrs. Parks' Monday evening, learned how to card, it is very hard work and my hands are nearly blistered, and my arm quite lame.
        Mrs. Marks spent the day with us yesterday, and we all worked together, Miss Mary and I tied up our heads, but Mrs. Marks did not, and her hair is full of lint; it flies about so, all over the floor and our dresses.
        Misses Puss and Hannah Bry were up to see us Monday evening, they are very pleasant indeed.
        The weather has been rainy or cloudy all the week, yesterday it was quite warm.
        We have heard of victories won by our soldiers in Western Virginia, Missouri and Texas. It is reported, and believed, that at Leesburg three hundred Federalists were killed and the rest (one thousand five hundred) taken prisoners; in Missouri Gen'l Lyon is killed and Siegel reported wounded. I hope all these good reports are true, it is almost incredible that at Leesburg only six of our men were killed and nine wounded.
        I forgot to mention that Father called upon Miss Stewart while in Vicksburg, she is forty or fifty years old, rubs snuff and pets a lap dog, the first is no objection but the last two are. Besides this, she never stays in one place longer than six months, this last would deter
us from engageing her, as we wish a permanent teacher.
        Mr. Barron has reccommeded another Miss Stuart to Father, I am to write to her this evening, but do not feel much confidence in the reccommendation.
Wednesday--August 28th/61--
        Willie, Miss Mary, and Rose have all been sick since Sunday, Willie was taken with a chill Sunday, but has not had any since, he is walking about today, but looks badly.
        Miss Mary has been very sick, she too had a chill Sunday, and another Monday. She is very very weak, and her face, hands and whole body are painfully thin. Mother sent for Dr. Whyte yesterday morning, he prescribed the invariable calomel and quinine, she is somewhat better this morning, but is utterly prostrated, she will never get well until she has a change of air and scene. I think this attack was brought on by exposure, Friday afternoon she went out to ride on horseback with three or four girls and boys, it was very damp, but the girls came for her, and she wanted to go so much that Mother could not refuse her; it was the first ride she had taken this year and she went four or five miles, then she came home she had a boisterous dance until dark. Then again Saturday evening we took tea at Mrs. Noble's with a party of girls and boys, and after playing in the yard for some time, came home after dark, it was not raining but was cloudy; and the damp air, together with such an unusual amount of violent exercise was too much for Miss Mary in her weak state.
        Rose has had an attack of common chills, she has missed the chills today and will probably be up this evening.
        Father left for Vicksburg Monday afternoon. we expect him back tonight.
 Rain, rain, I sometimes think it will never stop, it rained all last week, we had a short respite Sunday morning but the rain commenced in the evening and continued steadily all night, Monday morning it "held up" for a few hours and we hoped it would clear off but it commenced again and rained all night. Yesterday was a regular rainy day, no cessation, and the air was raw and chilly, last night a continuous dropping, this morning after breakfast we hailed the bright sunshine with delight but a brisk shower quenched our hopes, now the sun has come out again, and as it seemed to be growing brighter I think it may clear up. Our house leaks all over, in some places the floor is beginning to mildew! every thing is damp, and the mould is constantly accumulating on books and boxes, every night this week I have been awaked by the rain dropping on my pillow and have laid down again with a wash basin at my head to catch the water. Father took a great deal of trouble to get cypress boards so as to have the roof tight, but they were too thin and have all split.
        Mother and I sewed for the soldiers yesterday, we made three flannel shirts, with Emmeline's help in the evening.
        Mother and I are knitting woolen socks for the soldiers, Mother has begun her second pair, but I have not finished my first one yet, it is the second sock I ever knit.
        The three victorys I spoke of have been confirmed, we are on the rapid road to success