Monday, Dec. 11th. 1864.
        It has been so long since I wrote that I can scarcely remember where I left off. I have not had school for about two weeks. Father went to Downsville to carry the wheat to mill a week ago last Tuesday, and George and Loring went with him, they returned Wednesday it is true, but we were very busy making over some old dresses for Miss Mary and Eva and so we did not have school. Monday Miss Mary and I went over to Mrs. Dortch's and spent the day and night, and such a delightful day as it was, Mrs. Dortch is such a sweet, agreeable lady and has such a pleasant husband, and nice boys and such a cunning little boy, and altogether there are so many such agreeables about the family, I could never eulogize them enough. We found Eliza Baker and her Grandmother, Mrs. Warfleld, there spending the day, which added to its pleasantness. The next morning before leaving Mrs. Dortch
gave as a number of rose cuttings and one or two roots which I have not yet set out in my garden an account of the cold.
        We called at Mrs. Willson's on our return to Monroe, and while there a soldier came up who was on his way home from the other side of the Mississippi river, and wanted Mrs. W. to send him to Monroe, as we were going directly in we took him in the carriage with us; in return he entertained us with many miraculous stories which I have not time to recount here, but one was so extraordinary I cannot omit it. He had been in prison in Elmira, New York, for ten months; said the Yankees were very cruel to them, for instance, once they shot fifteen at once, with one ball, as they were lying asleep! "are you sure, sir?" said I "Oh yes, he said, the ball passed through the bodies of five, killing them instantly, and wounded the other ten so they died." What a pity people can't tell the truth!
        We got to Mrs. Stevens' some time before dimmer, I felt very weak and ill all day, and did not enjoy it as much as I usually do a visit to Mary. In the evening Eliza Baker came up to tea, and some gentlemen came in afterwards. I suppose it was on account of my dullness that the evening passed heavily to me; I have been so little in society for so long a time that the light conversation which generally forms the staple between young ladies and gentlemen is quite strange and distasteful to me, as it always was, and I am utterly unable to carry it on with any spirit.
        The next day we received an invitation to spend the day at Miss Warfield's, we did so and found it extremely pleasant; Mrs. Warfield is a very nice lady and exerted herself easily and agreeably to entertain us. She gave me some rose cuttings and quite a number of bulbous roots for my garden. It was
quite late when the carriage came up from Mrs. Stevens' for us, and the evening had grown cold though the morning had been very pleasant. We found we could not cross at the Trenton ferry and drove down to Monroe. There was a very obliging wagon master there, who gave himself a good deal of trouble to put us across, the flat was just loading, and had a government wagon with four mules on it; but he uncoupled the mules and drew up his wagon, and Uncle Jim drove down, when lo and behold! the front wheels only of the carriage could get on the flat, but they took out the mules, pulled in the carriage, took out the tongue, and we were all on. The flat was jammed, there was not room for the men to row hardly, Miss Mary and I sat in the carriage, the sky was darkly clouded, the north wind blew us down the river and we were twenty minutes crossing. Oh, how thankful and rejoiced we were when we reached this side, we closed up the carriage and rode comfortably home, they were all quite surprised to see us at such a late hour. We found Mr. Templeton here on his way to Texas. Mary Stevens had asked me to come in Friday and go to a surprise party to be given at Mr. M'Fee's. I told Mother about it, and at first she did not appear to want me to go, I had not expected she would and was not disappointed, but was much surprised the next morning when she sent for me out of the school room to come and prepare a dress to go. It was a purple grenadine which Father had bought for her five years ago in New York, and which she had never made up; we worked very busily, and succeeded in finishing it just in time Friday. Father went to Trenton and crossed the river with me, and we found Mrs. Stevens' carriage waiting for me on the other side. It was quite cold, very cold indeed, for it had sleeted the night before and the ground was
wet, but we went to the party. The rooms were well warmed, and there were a great many young ladies there, most of them pretty and well dressed, and a plenty of young men. We had, or at least I had, a delightful evening, I danced about half the sets, would have danced more as I am so fond of it but there were so many prettier young ladies present, and better acquainted with the gentlemen, that I could not expect much attention, however, I enjoyed looking on very much when I did not dance. This is the first party I ever attended. It was quite late when we returned home, Mrs. Willson and Julia were of our party but went out home that night. Mrs. Willson's second daughter has at last reached home, she has been away seven years, and it is four years since her Mother saw her! And now I come to what I have been hardly restraining myself all this time, I have got a letter, a long, precious letter at last from my dear Valeria. Oh, it has made me so happy, every now and then I wonder what makes me feel so happy and then I remember it in her letter. I cannot describe the pleasure it gives me; somehow it seems as if all the bitter past four years were blotted out, and it was as when I last saw her, before the war. Ah, before the war. I was at Mrs. Stevens', I have been looking for a letter for several weeks and hoping every time I sent to the post office, but this time I had sent and a mail from the east had come, but was obliged to go to Shreveport for distribution, but Father came up to Mrs. Stevens' Saturday before dinner and after I had spoken to him and kissed him said "What would you give for a letter" I said "You are joking Pa, there is none for me." I began to feel in his coat pocket, no, he said, and stooped to his overcoat. I took the letter in a sort of maze and looked at it blindly, he said "Eufaula at
last." I could have cried for joy, I could open the letter but turned it over and over and was so glad. I have read it over and over since then, I have her again in my sight as I read those lines so lately from her hand, my darling, my dearest friend.
        But I am very tired and cold, and though I could write pages thus, my tired side admonishes me I have been sitting too long. Mary Stevens came out with me, I full of my happiness enjoyed the ride fully, but she was made sick by the motion, she spent the night with us, and returned yesterday afternoon.
        I received a note from Willie Saturday, he was just starting on a raid to the river, after mules he thought, all the Yankees had left the river. He was quite well, I am so glad of that, but Oh how cold he must be this freezing weather, it has been very cold for several days, and last night made thick ice; and poor Willie has but two blankets an the frozen ground.
Tuesday, Dec. 20th.
        We have had such a long week of warm, cloudy weather; yesterday evening the wind changed to the north and the rain came down in torrents, and we hoped it would clear this morning, but it has kept up a slow, cold drizzle all day.
        Mr. Barr passed Sunday evening and left a letter for me from Mrs. Morancy, she says they will expect the children, and insists upon my going up with them, but I cannot do so, I would like it very much if it were best for me to go. She says they have been having concerts and tableaux at Homer
for the benefit of our suffering Missouri soldiers, they have already made $3,000. The papers we received yesterday contain very exciting news, we learn that Sherman is down in the heart of Georgia, has passed through Milledgeville, destroying all the public buildings, there are rumours that we have defeated Sherman terribly at Millen; so near Uncle David! Every Georgian is in arms, they mist have passed right by our old Oakland. Oh, I am so excited when I think of it, how I wish I were a man and in Georgia, how I wish I were there anyway, to know what they we doing, to rejoice with our noble Georgians, and with all the brave soldiers who are there fighting for us; for I am sure the Yankees are but marching to their own destruction; it seems to me Sherman's audacity is unequalled, but he will meet his just reward. Yet though I do thus wish to be as it were on the scene of action, yet it seemed to me yesterday for the first time that I could begin to see a mercy in our being held back from crossing the river, we should probably have been in that part of Georgia which has been made a battle ground.
        I read the President's message this morning, it is indeed fine in every respect, so calm, earnest, eloquent, and bringing all it's strength from that high faith in right and humanity, and that strong reliance on God which so enobles human nature.
        We have finished "The Antiquary," which we all liked very much of course, and which we shall be talking about for the next week or two; we were interrupted two nights in the most exciting part. Mr. Gordon has been attending to some business for Father, and in return Father undertook to do a part of his tax assessing over here, he was absent three days. The
first night Mr. Gordon very unexpectedly came over to stay all night, and we were all highly astonished by a call from Dr. Melton in the evening; the next night as Loring was away, we thought we would wait until Saturday night when Father would be at home. Mr. Gordon came up again Saturday night to see Father, but we read in spite of his visit, and he seemed highly entertained. I have been writing more by feeling than sight for some time, and precious penmanship I have made of it, it is now quite too dark to write any more.
Friday, Dec. 31st. 1864.
        I am all alone in the house. Father and Miss Mary and Eva left yesterday. Oh, we miss them so very much, all the house seems desolate. Mother and I sit together to keep our spirits up but succeed but poorly.
        I was very busy yesterday "cleaning up and putting to rights" in my room, which was indeed an operation sadly needed after the work and confusion to get the children ready. I have been doing nothing today but read that marvellously eloquent and tender book "Les Miserables," it is so beautiful, it seems to distill the spirit of a compassionate Saviour from the most miserable as well as the grandest beings in human nature.
        Mother and the children have gone down to Mrs. Lidwell's this evening. I stayed at home to write a letter, but as it is a letter to Julia Compton I don't know how far I shall get in it, it is so pleasant to feel that everything here in my room is perfectly clean and orderly as I know by personal inspection, truly I think neatness forms a part of that broad basis upon which enjoyment is built; then this quiet house in which there is not a soul but myself, this wind sweeping through the leafless treetops
and branches hung with withered leaves with such a beautiful living music, and above all the beautiful, lovely blue sky, with white, feathery clouds flecking it, and the warm, brilliant sunlight falling upon the landscape which winter has shorn of all its covering, with that peculiar brightness which makes us feel light and life and warmth and yet penetrates the heart with a sort of etherial stillness which I have never seen expressed so much to mind as in that line "Sunshine lay sleeping on the hill," thus it lies sleeping on that brown hillside, thus it lightens that beautiful sky against which rises the strong, dark and spiritual heads of my pines, and it seems to me the soul of this sunshine is gathered into and breathes out from the little violets which sweetly perfume my desk, and which bring to my soul the loveliness of spring, though they are only one or two which have peeped out after the freezing cold. Then through the open window comes the twitter of little birds, the small hum of insects and the living sound which adds instead of diminishing the silence. All these things fill my soul with quiet rapture, they incline me to delicious reverie, and my mind is softened by the deep pathos of the grand renunciations of Jean Val Jean and the sufferings of the poor little Cosette. I have for a long time been so very busy, it is so long since I have been thus alone with the sunshine and the wind and the trees, that I take pleasure in my idleness, in a certain freedom for all cares, from all occupation that is so delightful when rarely enjoyed. How impossible is it for me to express all this quiet rapture, all the grateful swelling of the heart, all the music of the soul which this deep, this eternal music of the winds awakes as it passes
over me. If I had the pen of a ready writer, if I had the art, the marvellous art of combining into a melody of sounds all this melody of the senses, the heart, soul, and mind, how blest I would be, but Oh, how blest am I and how I thank Him who has given to me the capability of joy which is so pure and deep since it comes from Him.
        But let me now remember and write these what we call events, but which are not events as much as a new thought or a happy feeling. The date with which I commenced reminds me that Christmas has passed, that the Old year is passing through its last days, were it not for this date I could indeed hardly persuade myself that it is so, for how unlike is this to December, and how unlike is this quiet time to Christmas week! All Christmas day I kept saying over and over "it is Christmas" to keep myself in mind of it. It was very much like any other Sunday, only sometimes we would hear a "Merry Christmas," which sounded hollow, like the echo of past times; we had an egg nogg in the morning but drank it with only an occasional attempt at hilarity. Mr. Gordon came up Christmas eve and spent the day with us, we had a very fine dinner, which we could not fully enjoy for thinking of Willie. In the evening we had some ice cream which the children malted at the fire, and so the day passed. I had an hour of pleasure when I read the Christmas service and beautiful Psalms and lessons and again in the evening when Miss May and I contemplated the glories of the setting sun. We retired early as we were fatigued with having sat up late the night before to reach a good stopping place in "Old Mortality," in which we were all highly interested, Mr. Gordon included.
        I am afflicted much for the past month or two with a dreadful debility
which at nightfall sometimes almost prostrates me, especially in warm weather; we have had so much warm, damp weather since the winter months commenced. Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday we were very busy preparing for the approaching departure of the children. As the roads were very bad and we had but few mules, Father concluded to take Miss Mary and Eva in the North Carolina wagon, which was obliged to go to carry their baggage, so Thursday morning early it was brought up to the door to pack, this was quite an undertaking as they carried all their bedroom furniture, besides clothing and books, the wagon was quite full even with Father's close packing; they had such a nice seat, Father laid their mattress on the floor with part of it against two trunks for the back and part against the wagon sides so that they had a complete large easy chair, which was very soft with blankets laid on it. Father sat just before them on some blankets laid on the corn, Prince rode one of the mules; it me so hard to tell them goodbye for such a long time. It was lonesome indeed for Willie to be gone, but doubly lonesome now; we miss them especially at meal times where the table is now almost round, and at night when it used to be so pleasant around the fire, but now only Mother and I are left.
        A Mr. James, and Mr. Britt took supper here last night and the former remained all night. Mr. Britt said he saw Willie at Oak Ridge a few days ago, that he was well and on detached service.
        I believe I have not written here since Tabitha (now Mrs. Shields) was here, she and her husband and baby spent the night with us last week on their way to Homer, I was so glad to see her, and she has such a sweet little baby.
    The setting sun warns me that I must leave this and commence Julia Compton's letter if I would finish it tonight.