April 13th--
        Father has been gone two weeks today, and we cannot hope for his return until next Sunday, the time passes so slowly while he is gone. I never can bear for him to be away, but I think I feel it now more than I ever did before. Oh! what a time is this, the past week has been one of feverish excitement, Tuesday we received news of a great battle, near Corinth, Miss. Every day since we have been hearing scraps of news from the battle field, on Wednesday we were triumphant conquerors,


but the enemy reinforced by sixty thousand fresh troops was preparing to attack us. All is uncertainty, and dread rumours of every kind are floating around, but I believe we must be victorious; my heart sickens when I think that under this beautiful blue sky, with God's heavensent air breathing warm and fructifying around, while the birds sing, and the green leaves wave as if to praise their Creator, thousands of men are mingling in mortal combat, and groans and shrieks sounding amid the roar of artillery and the trampling of cavalry, the picture is too dreadful; how many Mothers and sisters wives and children sit in despair or suspense this day. Oh, if there be a retributive justice what shall be the fate of those wicked men who have sent their myrmidons to bathe our land in the blood of it's children. But if they die in body, their names shall live in our memory, and when in after days the stains of blood have been obliterated from the figure of Freedom, we shall remember and generations after us shall bless those who died for their country.
        Willie has gone to Monroe this morning to get the news, we can scarcely wait for, and yet dread his return. We have not heard from Father since he left, the whole country is in such a state of excitement, and the railroads so thronged with soldiers that the mails cannot be relied upon.
Sunday, April 20th--
        The battle at Corinth was another added to our victories, but the work is yet but begun, ennemies threaten us on every side, and we must soon hear of another great battle. The Yankees have stormed and taken Fort Pulaski, and surrounded island No. 10 so that we surrendered. We daily of skirmishes, and an approaching fight in eastern Virginia, and of a threatened attack upon New Orleans; now we need bravery and coolness,
and now I believe our rulers and our people art showing it.
        Gen'l. Johnston was killed at Corinth, every one mourns him. The conscription law has been passed, and thirty days from the time it passed every male between eighteen and thirty-five years, not legally exempt, must be enrolled in defence of our cause. We are waiting anxiously for Father to return, it is three weeks tonight since he left, and we have only heard from him once; two bridges have been burned on the route, and Huntsville, Ala. is in the possession of the Yankees, so that he cannot come by the most direct way; Willie looks for him with much impatience, to decide whether or not he shall go to the war. Willie says he cannot stay at home; though if he applied he could easily get exemption from the conscript law on account of his arm and his ill health.
        I hope the latter is getting better he has not had a chill in a long time. This has been quite a cold day, fires have been necessary for comfort, it rains a good deal last week and this morning cleared off cold, it seems as it we shall never have settled warm weather.
        This is Easter Sunday, at the commencement of Lent the Yankee papers said that in forty days the stars and stripes should float over New Orleans, their boast has not been verified. God grant I may never see the day that such a thing shall happen!
        Miss Mary's and my little violet bushes bore their first flowers this week.
April 27th.
        Father returned home last Wednesday night, we were rejoiced to see him, he had great difficulty in getting home, the roads were so crowded, he did not enter a passenger car from the time he left Jackson until he returned, at one time he found the train under the control of a regiment of South Carolinians, and he went to the Superintendant of
the road, with whom he was acquainted, to try and get a passage, the Superintendent told him he might go if he could get in; so Father went back and crept cautionsly into the baggage car, where he was unobserved by the soldiers; but the Col. of the regiment was late, and when he came the conductor refused to run the train saying that there was danger of a collision, so Father got out as quietly as he got in, and waited till the next day, when they took the freight train schedule and went on.
        We have just heard such sad news, there are thirteen of the Yankee gunboats moored at the New Orleans wharf, they have given the city four days in which to remove foreign property and residents, and women and children, the four days will be out on Tuesday, and what will happen then we cannot tell; some say the city will not resist, others that it will, the forts below the city are still in our possession, they keep the transports from ascending the river, they say that the gunboats came three abreast..
        Gov. Moore is expected at Monroe. Father left this evening, if New Orleans is taken he will not go there, of course. Mother is busy making up Willie's clothes, he expects to leave when Father returns, I sewed on his shirts yesterday, it is melancholy work, my heart sinks when I think of it, but I try to keep brave.
        I received a letter from Miss Valeria day before yesterday, Mr. McNair was killed in the battle of Corinth; also Mr. Richarsdson, whom we met at Amite. Horace was killed in a skirmish on the peninsula, poor Horace, I had hoped he would live to redeem the errors of his early life, his officers spoke highly of him.
        If New Orleans is taken the Yankees will probably soon have command of the river, I cannot bear to think of it. I wrote to Miss Valeria
this morning, I felt as if I was writing a farewell, and now that the letter is gone, it seems as it I were cut off from her; never did I feel the value of her friendship as I do now.