Tuesday, Dec. 9th/ 1862--
        The small pox is really in Monroe, there are now four cases there, not soldiers but in private families, we have at last succeeded in getting some vaccine matter, two returned soldiers stopped here last
Tuesday night, one of whom had been vaccinated and still had the matter in his arm, the next morning he vaccinated George, Joe and little Jim, but George's has not yet taken, Dr. Young will vaccinate his children from this. Mrs. Byrne was to come out to Dr. Young's tonight, the small pox was next door to them in Monroe, I do not think it is at all right for them to go to the Doctor's as they could easily have hired a summer house somewhere in this neighborhood.
        Willie is not at home now, he left Sunday to go about sixty miles from here into Arkansas to try and get some hogs, I hope he will succeed, it is very difficult to get meat at any price here, pork is twenty-five cents, and bacon impossible to get, the last was bought at fifty cents. We expect Willie back tomorrow or next day.
        We heard from Father Sunday, he telegraphed from Richmond to Mr. McGuire to call a meeting of the directors to elect a president for this road in his stead, so I suppose he has accepted the situation. I am sorry and yet I am glad, for I know he can do a great deal of good for the Country, and I feel that we ought not to think of ourselves-- it will be hard to be separated from him.
        Saturday evening Julia Compton and Miss Lucy Seale came down to see me, Julia invited me to go home and spend the night with her, I went, and enjoyed myself very well, became acquainted with Mrs. Compton and Miss Mary, and learned how to plait palmetto for hats, Maggie was plaiting some for a hat for one of the negroes.
        The weather is delightful now, it rained all the first part of last week, but has been clear ever since Thursday. I commenced "Cosmos" a week ago Saturday, but have only had time to finish the introduction yet.
Wednesday night, 11th of Dec. 1862--
        We have our first fire in our room
tonight, how pleasant it is to feel the grateful warmth, and see the homelike light on the walls.
        We have some more poor people here tonight, a young soldier who was taken sick in the swamp, his Father came for him, and was himself attached with inflammatory rheumatism, lastly the Mother left her young children and came down for them, hearing of the small pox in Monroe they left immediately, though the son is very weak and the father not able to be taken out of the carriage. The young man was carried upstairs, but the poor woman was obliged to stay out at the carriage with her husband. Oh! this terrible war.
Thursday, Dec. 18th--
        Since I wrote last we have heard again from Father, Mother received a letter from him last Saturday he has really accepted the position offered him as chief of all the railroads in our Confederacy, with the title of Assistant adjutant Gen'l. and with the rank of Colonel, he says that it is the opinion of the secretary of war that it will be necessary for his to have a separate bureau. I grieve to have Father separated from us, but am willing to submit to this if he can benefit our country, and I know he can do it; I feel no selfish pride in his elevation to such a conspicuous and important position, though I feel a worthy pride in my Father when I reflect on the change which his own intellect, industry and energy have produced since he set his foot on Georgia soil, a youth of twenty, with no fortune but his trade, a half dollar and a few changes of clothes, and--his own genius and will; now he can protect and aid the country which has been his foster mother.
        Father writes that it he establishes his headquarters in Richmond he should like to have me spend several months there, I should like to go very much on some accounts, but yet I wish to remain at home. We hope
to see Father the first of next week.
        All the children were vaccinated Sunday morning, also some from the neighborhood, the matter was taken from the arms of Joe and George.
        We had such an amusing traveller here the other night, he was a perfect fool, I have read of such characters but never met one before, he kept us all in a constant agony of suppressed laughter. He said he was sometimes afraid that the prophecies of Isaiah would now be accomplished from "the simple fact" that the "masculine gender would be almost extinguished by this war"--how ridiculous!
Dec. 25th/ 1862--
        Christmas night, it has been a sad Christmas day to us Father was not here, we received a dispatch Tuesday night saying that he must return to Richmond before coming home, it was a great disappointment, since we had at least hoped that he would arrive Christmas eve. Today has seemed just like Sunday, while at dinner we received some papers one of which contained a list of the wounded, among them was a Capt. Green. I am sure it must be Mr. Robt. Green, for he was at Fredericksburg and was in the 21st regiment.
        Mother and I went to see a new neighbour, a family from the swamp who have rented Mr. Richardson's place just opposite, their name is Dawson, there are three young ladies in the family, we only saw the eldest she is quite pretty, pleasant and of a fashionable appearance.
        Mrs. Wheatly was married Tuesday night to Mr. Mays, the soldier whom she has nursed so long. There was no one invited, as the bridegroom was too lame to stand and did not wish to have any company.
Friday--Dec. 26th.
        Our turn has come at last, we heard this morning that the Yankees had come as far as Delhi (on the railroad) burning everything in their
track, and coming four miles an hour, we know nothing of their force, all suppose that they are coming to Monroe. I do not know whether our few troops will resist or not. Willie is gone in at full speed to ascertain the of the matter and to bring back our teams which went in this morning for corn. Oh if Father was here! I am determined, come what may, never to renounce my country, but what is before us!
        The negroes are busy barbecueing and cooking for their party tonight, they may have to start away before day, but we shall let enjoy themselves while they can.
Night--
        Willie returned this evening, bringing us no further news, Mr. McGuire thinks that the Yankees have e'er this gone back to their gunboats, it is true that they laid Delhi in ashes.
        General Blanchard has ordered all the men under forty five to meet at Cotton post tomorrow morning early, he purposes to make a stand at Monroe, I hope he will.
        We have been watching the negroes dancing for the last two hours, Mother had the partition taken down in our old house so that they have quite a long ball room, we can sit on the piazza and look into it. I hear now the sounds of fiddle, tambourine and "bones" mingled with the shuffling and pounding of feet. Mr. Axley is fiddling for them, they are having a merry time, thoughtless creatures, they think not of the morrow.
        I am sad, very sad, tonight, last Christmas Father watched their dancing with us; where is he now? where shall we all be next Christmas, and tomorrow Willie must go, perhaps to battle, I do not feel a single complaint in my heart, but I am very sad.
        Monday Dec. 28th--Willie went to Monroe Saturday and brought back
humiliating, but still welcome news compared to what we expected, there were only fifty five Yankees, who came to Delhi, burned the railroad warehouse and several other buildings, together with a car containing a quantity of cloth for the soldiers, they also burned several important bridges, so that the cars cannot now run further then Delhi, about half way to Vicksburg; and all this damage done by a few contemptible Yankees, while our own contemptible General Blanchard was shivering with fright in Monroe, and there was a whole company of our soldiers in the but they happened to be watching the wrong place, if we only had a man for a General instead of the effeminate creature we have, these raids might be prevented, and this important railroad left open for the benefit of the whole country.
        Mr. Murrah dined with us yesterday, he was on his way to Mississippi but was stopped by this Yankee demolition of the railroad and will be obliged to travel from Delhi to the river on horseback.
        We have not yet heard from Father.