1865
January 5th. 1865.
        The clouds have just broken and the setting sun is shining brightly through, the clear, warm weather continued untill last night when it rained quite heavily, and has only stopped since dinner. Father came home yesterday which delighted us all very much; it seemed as if the rain had just waited untill he reached home, he has been troubled all day, as well as yesterday evening by a pain in his side which Mother says is a "nervous" pain, but Father says he never was nervous. Father brought me a letter from Miss Mary, it is sweetly natural and pretty, so like her that it seems to me I hear her talking. They are not yet settled, as Mr. Barr is still at home. Mrs. Morancy did not write, which was quite a disappointment to me.
        We commenced school again Monday, and Loring and George have been very good, Loring seems to be really trying to improve, but the multiplication table is a hard thing, poor fellow! John has been up in the school room several times and has learned four letters!
        I have such a sweet white hyacinth on my bureau, it is not yet quite fully blown, I picked it, this morning for fear that the rain and the succeeding cold would spoil it, but I do not think it will be very cold tonight. I received two letters Sunday, one from Lois and Grandma, and one from Kate
Stone. Grandma's was dated Oct. 31st; contains no public news; but one short sentence which makes us all very sorry, Mrs. Veader is dead. We were prepared by a letter Capt. Reynolds received from Mrs. Eastmann for this sad news; but alas we are always astonished to hear of the death of a friend.
Saturday night, Jan. 14th.
        I have from day to day put off writing in my journal; but as it is Saturday night and I have a good deal to write, and Mother and Father being tired, have gone to bed though it is only eight o'clock, I determined to open my book.
        The present absorbing topic of thought and conversation with us is a letter, a long expected, long desired letter from Willie which was brought this morning by Antony, who has brought Flora up to recruit after some hard service down in the mud. Willie's letter is written in good spirits, he says they are treated with great kindness by the citizens of Tensas parish, who furnish them with plenty to eat and give them balls and dinners very frequently; he has been in to DeSoto with a flag of truce and their party were allowed to purchase any luxuries they desired, or--had money for. Willie says he was in a fight with Luke Earle's robber band, that they were quite defeated and abandoned horses and arms to quite a number. One of the party on our side was severely wounded, and another had a ball through his coat, but Willie escaped though he writes that Flora was one of the foremost in the charge. I am very glad to know that they have plenty, I pray that this plenty may not corrupt the morals nor relax the energy of my beloved brother. He writes for Father to try and procure him some greenbacks,
there are forty dollars here belonging to Willie, the only ones any of us have ever had, but where to get more I know not. Willie says he has no clothes with him, as he left his saddlebags at Oak Ridge, they only expected to stay four days, but have been there a month; he says send Prince to him until Antony can come back, but I don't think we can send him as Father promised Mr. Gordon he should go with him on some business that he is going to attend to at Delhi. He is also going to try and buy two mules for Father, we need them very much indeed, for we have nothing to plough or drive except old Carry.
        Mr. Gordon came up here Sunday afternoon to see Father about the tax assessing, they expected to start on their round together Monday morning, but it commenced to rain in the night and continued all the next day, so that they could not leave until Tuesday morning, they were gone until Thursday. Mrs. Oliver and her two little girls came up to spend the day with us Thursday. Mrs. Oliver looks very plump and seems well, but she is quite too pale to look healthy; her older daughter Rilla is an intelligent girl and well behaved, and little Ella is very pretty, and has a pretty womanlike air. Lieut Jones came out to see Father Thursday, he has been here several times before but I have been away from home and had never seen him, he spent the night here and Father went in town with him and Mr. Gordon the next day. I like Lieut. Jones very well, he seems quite steady and sensible, and is more agreeable and well read than one would suppose from his appearance, which is at first sight not very prepossessing; he is very large and rather ungainly, has reddish shock hair, and a rough red beard on the lower part of his chin, his features are large
and massive and the face is ugly, except his forehead which is high and fine looking. He says that Mrs. Stevens gave a party about a week ago, I am surprised I was not invited but there must be some good reason for it, so I have not, and shall not feel the least "hard" about until I hear something from May.
        We heard such bad news Sunday, received a paper full of it. Oh, it was so dreadful at first, it seemed to me I could hardly bear my grief, and my hatred to the Yankees. Sherman has taken Savannah; he has marched from north to south, through the heart of Georgia, and boastfully says that he met with no hindrance nor obstacles, that his army is better supplied with provisions than when he started, and that his wagon train twenty miles long is perfectly safe; this in Georgia of which I was so proud, it seems it cannot be, and yet the evidence is too circumstantial to doubt, oh the proud boastful invaders, may they meet a downfall. Hardee drew out of Savannah with his entire force which was quite small, it was right to preserve it. Yankee news has also been received that Hood met a shameful defeat near Nashville, but Father heard yesterday that it was just the contrary. Oh, that it might be.
        I received a letter from Eva by Mr. Barr, who stayed all night with us a week ago Friday on his way to see his wife. Answered it by Nace the next day, also sent some things they left. Miss May enclosed a letter for Georgie in Eva's, he was perfectly delighted with it, this gave an impetus to Loring's efforts, he has been trying hard to write ever since, and has succeeded so well that he intends to enclose a letter to Eva the next time I write.------
Wednesday, Jan. 25th. 1865.
        Father went to them yesterday, he brought me a letter from Willie, he is still in Tensas, we were very glad indeed to hear from him, his letters always give me so much pleasure. He is perfectly well, and faring quite well too, but says he is very tired of being without a change of clothes, he expected to get some from home before this, how unfortunate it is that we could not send Prince. Willie says he has a yankee rifle of the newest patent, which shoots eight hundred yards, he has also a colt's army pistol. Mother used often to laugh and tell Willie he must not dare to come home without Yankee arms; she little thought he would really get them so soon. Though I feel a great deal of sympathy for the hardships Willie must endure, and anxiety about his welfare, yet I cannot help being very much gratified that he is now in a position which I conceive to be the only noble, honourable one a young man can now be engaged in, that is in active service for his country. I am sorry though, that the culpability or ignorance of the high officers rendered his command much less useful then it ought to be. I do not love Willie any more, my tenderness for him could scarcely have admitted increase, but this feeling is now joined with a sort of proud satisfaction that he is now doing his clear and manifest duty; and I am so deeply thankful that this course has resulted in an improvement of his health; may God graciously preserve him unto the end.
        Father brought me word yesterday that Mary Stevens and Mrs. Kenison were coming out to spend the night the night with us; Mrs. Kenison was going on the stage to Shreveport, thence by boat to Alexandria to see her husband who is sick. We expected them of course, but the carriage did not drive up
until twilight, meeting Mrs. Kenison first after greeting her I turned to Mary, as I supposed, how great was my surprise to see a figure a foot shorter, it was Mrs. Lemmy, who had come with Mrs. Kenison as Mary found she could not leave home, I was so much disappointed, and was not at all consoled by her short note which only said "it is impossible" without any reason for the impossibility; however she promised to come soon, and though that is very indefinite, still it affords some ground for expectation.
        I received a delightful letter from Miss Mary Saturday, answered it yesterday, she writes with all the unaffected freedom which is so pleasant in her manners; her letter was ten days on the way. She was very homesick, this I hope has worn off now that she has commenced school and become engrossed in her studies. I shall hope for a letter from Eva next Saturday, shall not hear as often as I expected since the mail leaves Homer but once a week.
        It is very cold indeed today, Mrs. Kenison was obliged to rise very early this morning, and from some misunderstanding about the hour the stage started, she was ready three hours or more before the time. She rose at two o'clock, of course we were all awake, I slept no more at all, but lay talking to her until dawn, my usual time for rising. Our room was very warm, and we had a cup of hot coffee at about three, so she was quite comfortable. Her escort as far as Shreveport is Lieut. Henry Holmes, who called for her this morning. I am afraid all her wrappings and hot bricks will hardly prevent suffering from the cold today; it was so clear yesterday evening that we hoped the weather would moderate, but it is even colder today than yesterday, the sun has shone, but water has been freezing all day
long, we have a very warm fire in the dining room which has been kept up all day, but though I am only three or four feet from it my right hand is quite numb. Mother has taken a walk to Mrs. Craig's to warm her, the three little boys are gone with her, and Father and I are here alone, he is quite engrossed in O'Meara's "Napoleon at St. Helena," and this, together with a very severe cold, keeps him confined to the fireside. I spent the first part of my afternoon very delightfully in a careful perusal of two of Blair's lectures on Rhetoric, I think it is such an admirable and agreeable book; I am so fond of the study of Rhetoric and language in every form, and this book is so clear and easy that it is perfectly intelligible and enjoyable even to such a tyro as I am; while it seems to me that its gracefulness and accuracy must be agreeable to the most polished taste.
        I forgot to say above that Mrs. Lemmy left about ten o'clock this morning, she is a kind hearted, credulous, talkative little woman, and though full of simplicity, is not free either from affectation or a sort of childlike conceit. There now, I have multiplied adjectives and descriptive nouns enough for the most marvellous heroine of the most commonplace novel; the general resource of those who feel the feebleness of their descriptive powers.