Oakland
May 16th. 1863.
        Just a month since my last entry in my old book! What a busy month it has been, I cannot record all that has happened but will give a few items.
        About the 20th. of last month, Mrs. Stone (a lady from the swamp) came to Mother to get board for herself and family for a week; they had escaped from the swamp in haste and at night, lost all their clothing, except what was contained in one small trunk, and abandoned their house and furniture entirely to the Yankees and negroes. Mother was very reluctant to take them, but they urged it and she could not refuse persons in their situation, so they came, Mrs. Stone, Miss Kate, Rebecca and Jimmy and Johnny, they are a very pleasant family, have no small children Rebecca is eleven years old and a very nice, good little girl. Mrs. Stone has been here very little of the time, and Johnny and Jimmy have been away a great deal. Miss Kate is a very sweet young lady, so unaffected and agreeable. Mary Stevens came out and spent a week with me last month as she promised, it was a delightful week to me, that is (as pleasant as anything of that kind is, now when there is a continual trouble upon us all). Monday evening we were all looking at Gen'l Walker's division which was passing, and had just returned from the grove, when a gentleman rode up and inquired if we could accommodate Mrs. Maclay, wife of the adjutant inspector general, he said the Gen. was at Dr. Young's but they could not take Mrs. Maclay, Mother said yes and they soon drove up (Mrs. Maclay and his little girl Nannie). She travels all around with her husband, has an
ambulance nicely fitted up and is quite as comfortable as possible under the circumstances; she remained here until this morning, her husband Major Maclay was in the old army. All Gen. Walker's staff were camped over on Dr. Young's hill; they were young men and were quite agreeable, we saw a great deal of them, several came over every day. Tuesday evening we had a little soiree, invited the Misses Dawson, Carrie Young and Julia Compton besides the gentlemen of the staff, Mr. Axley fiddled for us and we danced and spent a very pleasant evening, the company did not leave until past two o'clock. Thursday we dined at Mrs. Compton's with the same party, went to dress parade in the evening but were too late, went again yesterday evening and saw Col. Flournoy's regiment parade, I had never seen it before and was perfectly delighted. I went in the ambulance with Mrs. Maclay and took all the children, Miss Mary went with Maggie Compton. Major Maclay was very kind to get us a good position and then to stand by and tell us about all the evolutions; he is such a very pleasant man, I like him very much and his wife is also very plain and agreeable. Last night we were at Mrs. Dawson's until twelve, the evening was quite pleasant, the starlight was beautiful. Major French drove me down in our buggy, he is a very pleasant man, so kind and yet gay enough and intelligent, besides him there were Major Mason, Major Stone, Captain Galt and Captain Smith, all Virginians except Major Stone from Arkansas. We had some quite pleasant incidents happen in connection with these soldiers. Saturday one came here for his dinner, and after dinner asked for some music, Miss Mary sang for him, and he seemed very much pleased, the soldiers were then on they way to Alexandria, but after the news of the fall of that place reached us, they were


ordered back, and this soldier in company with another stopped here on Sunday for some water, they had some water and milk and rested awhile and then went on after saying that they wished it were not Sunday so they could hear some music, we also regretted it. On Monday Haw's brigade passed and we went down in the grove to see them, Eva and Rebecca Stone were at the fence giving water to the soldiers, poor fellows! Tramping along the dusty road, they looked so warm that Mother had buckets of water carried down to the fence for them, they crowded around the buckets like bees and seemed so grateful, among these was the second soldier who came on Sunday, he said he would like to hear some singing and Eva told him to come up to the house and her sister would sing for him, we laughed and thought no more of it but looking in a few minutes we saw three men riding up to the door, sure enough they had come for the music, so we came in and gave them some, they stayed about an hour, and we found that the prominent one of the party was of the Georgia family of Tuckers, all of whom we had heard off, and had met some. Mother gave them some milk before they left and Miss Mary and Miss Kate put some flowers in their hats, when Mr. Tucker went to tell us goodbye the tears came in his eyes as he asked to know the name of those to whom he was so much indebted. The division is composed of strong, fine looking men, well clothed and apparently well drilled. The camp looked so nice yesterday evening when we went there, it was all swept so nicely and the men looked cheerful and busy, some were shaking out their blankets, some cooking, some playing marbles, some watering horses, and engaged in all manner of diverse occupations; but though the sight was cheerful yet it made me feel sad, I think in these scenes of those that are


gone forever. Major French and Major Mason came over this morning to bid us goodbye; we feel very quiet today after having so much excitement as we have had for the past week.
        Mrs. Stone and Jimmy are in Delhi, getting some negroes from their plantation. Willie has been as busy as possible for the past week arranging to have the railroad negroes brought over this side of the river, they are here now, about seventy. Poor Willie is getting quite pale and thin again, I hope all this fatigue will not make him sick again. The weather is quite cool for this season of the year, it is warm at Mid day but the mornings and evenings are almost cold.
Tuesday May 26th/ '63.
        We have three more "lodgers" now, really our house seems quite elastic, we thought it full to overflowing when Mrs. Stone came, but now we accommodate these ladies very well. Willie gave up his room and took an unfinished one on the north side of the house. Mother would not have taken these ladles but the circumstances of their case were so sad she could not refuse. Mrs. Barr and her daughter Mrs. Morancy are both widows. Mrs. Morancy was only a wife eighteen months, and her husband died recently, she has a little baby eight or nine months old. Mrs. Barr has lost two grown sons within the last two years, was obliged to leave her plantation, and lost a great deal, her house with all her furniture was burnt by her negroes a few days after she left it, her family now consists of her widowed daughter, a young lady daughter, Miss Julia, and Mr. Bowmar Barr and wife;
they are all scattered about, the two first here, Miss Julia at Mrs. Dortch's and the young couple (they have only been married three or four months) are keeping house at a cabin on Dr. Temple's land, I an so sorry for them, the cabin is built of logs without any ceiling or a single window; how hard it is for families to be separated in this way. We are really fortunate in our "lodgers," they are all such pleasant people. Mrs. Barr seems to be a very sweet lady,--her troubles, though many, have not soured her disposition at all.