Monday, April 1st / 1861--
        Father returned home Friday night in a storm of wind and hail, the hailstones were very large but fortunately the shower was short, and did not damage the fruit at all.
        Spring has now ascended her leafy throne and her sway is complete, the little blue violets are fast disappearing, and all the trees have leaved out almost entirely.
        Mr. John Green the engineer of this road was here Saturday night and part of Sunday morning, all the time I found myself making, not perhaps comparisons, but comparing him with Mr. Robt. or as we say, little Mr. Green, and I think nearly always, excepting of course the point of stature, in the favor of the latter. I think Mr. John Green not quite so polite, certainly not so polished as Mr. Robt. but more talkative and easier to become acquainted with. Altogether the taller Mr. Green has a lighter mind and perhaps less sterling qualities. Father thinks them both excellent persons and to Father's opinion I nearly always lean.
        Sunday afternoon we walked up to our place, which is now bought,
and then to Dr. Young's. It is so delightful to have a home in such near prospect, I am thinking about it nearly all the time, they commenced clearing out the undergrowth this morning. Father, Willie, Miss Mary, Lory and I went up there and spent about half an hour in looking at them and directing them how to cut. Willie seven or eight hands there, and the clearing will soon be completed, Father has drawn the plan of the house, it is to be all on one story; a hollow square with a court in the centre and piazzas all round, inside and out, the number of rooms is twenty, counting in dressing rooms bath rooms Storeroom, pantry, and so forth. Father has projected innumerable improvements and beauties to be placed on our two hills, I hope they will be realized.
        Father left us for Vicksburg this afternoon. We are expecting Aunt Jane tonight.
Wednesday April 10th /'61--
        Aunt Jane has been here nearly two weeks and will probably remain two more. Since I wrote last, we have had a great deal of rain. Willie went to Monroe a week ago today with a team to haul out the boiler for their mill, it commenced raining Wednesday night, rained Thursday, and poured down Thursday night, in consequence of this the creeks all overflowed their banks, bridges were reported swept away, and the mud was perfectly apalling, poor Willie got wet and cold, could not move the boiler more than a mile in two days and thought that he would never attempt to haul a steam boiler again; Pa was away at Vicksburg, Uncle Moses at Monroe, and we sat here and heard the rain, and suffered in think--how they must suffer. Friday the rain "held up" a little right after breakfast, Mother went over to Mrs. Adams to help them quilt, and Aunt Jane and I, accompanied by Loring and Eva went down to Steep bayou,
which is just a few steps from here to see how the water had risen, we found a cotton waggon and the stage at the bridge in a perfect quondary, the first bridge was not overflowed, but all the low land around it was inundated, the further bridge, for the bayou there doubles round and makes an I island was reported to be swept away, at length the stage driver plunged in and we, seeing the rain coming, hurried back into the house, all day the rain poured down without intermission though it lightened a very little towards evening.
        We were sitting down quietly after dinner, I reading Waverly and Miss Mary and Aunt Jane listening, when we heard a familiar voice holloa Whoa! we jumped, ran out to the door and there was Father, dripping wet, he had ridden all the way from Monroe in the rain. He went to the fire and we left him to change his clothes, hardly had we got out when Mrs. Adams' buggy drove up with Mother, while she was getting out, the galloping of horses hoofs was heard and turning round we beheld Willie, urging Mollie to her greatest speed, dressed in a thin pair of summer pants and without a coat. He dashed into the house and almost his first sentence after saluting us was "Sadie, I have lost your letters"; they were some which I had sent to be mailed. I was too glad to see Willie back in safety to care anything about my letters.
        Saturday and Sunday Father remained at home, we have had no rain since Friday until this morning. Yesterday we had all just set out to visit our place before Father went in to Monroe, we had passed out the gate and were walking up the road when we met Mr. Raoul, we were all perfectly astonished but very much pleased to see him, he said that he had come up to Vicksburg intending to go out to Meridian (on the Southern road) with Mr. Smedes and Mr. Green, but that Mr. Smedes had put it
off until Friday, and as he had a spare day, he concluded to come out and see us. He returned to the house with us and took some breakfast, and then we all walked up to the place. Mr. Raoul thought it a beautiful situation for a house. He and Father both went to Vicksburg this morning.
        I think this will be a real rainy day, it commenced before breakfast and has continued ever since. I do not mind it so much now as Willie has brought the boiler nearly to the mill, but I would rather it would not rain until he had it all the way.
Thursday, April 11th--
        Ah, me! Shall I ever finish recording the accidents of this unhappy year; poor Willie is the sufferer this time, he has cut his foot, not dangerously to be sure but seriously enough to prevent his walking for two or three days. He was driving a plank under the waggon wheel yesterday afternoon, with the eye of an axe when the helve broke, the axe flew off upon a plank and then rebounding cut through his boat and wounded his foot near the joint of the great toe, cutting one or two small arteries. He immediately mounted a mule and came home, when he arrived his foot had bled nearly a quart, and was still bleeding profusely, his whole boot and the clothes which he had wrapped around were full of clotted blood.
        Mother immediately sent for Dr. White, who arrived in a few minutes, stopped the blood and bound up the foot, it is doing very well now, but Willie is so restless and anxious to attend to his business that we can scarcely keep him still. The boiler is at last at the mill, after having been nine days on the way.
        I am not very well, all day yesterday, that is after 10 o'clock, I was confined to the couch with a dreadful headache.
Uncle Moses came this morning; we expect Father this evening. I must go now and the papers Uncle Moses brought, he says we are to have war.
Thursday, April 18th /61--
        I am afraid war is inevitable, Ft. Sumter is ours by surrender, Ft. Pickens has been reinforced and was to be attacked on the 15th. The President of the United States has issued a proclamation which may be considered a virtual declaration of war, and which must irritate the south, he refuses to recognise the claim of the Southern confederacy to a place in the family of nations, but considers secession rebellion and commands all persons forming this ''combination" to disperse and regain their position as peaceful citizens of the United States in twenty days. He says that the rights and property of all peaceful citizens shall be respected, this proclamation was issued before the Charleston guns had compelled the surrender of Ft. Sumter, since then, from the tenor of the dispatches we may suppose that Lincoln has wavered a little; Oh! how melancholy, how melancholy is the state of our country, never since the death of Cain was such unnatural, uncalled for war; where is the reason of the North fled, she has utterly withdrawn her light, what do they purpose? What benefits can they have in view that they will introduce all the horrors of civil war into our country, think they, that they can compel the South into a Union which they have so perfidiously disregarded, Oh! rather will every man, woman, and child perish upon the soil that gave them birth and from which they draw their sustenance rather than call down the curses of our free Forefathers upon the degenerate race who could stoop to ask admittance again intoo a Union of name when there is hatred and treachery in the hearts of those with whom we have been United.


   My heart shrinks and all my bravery seems to fly when I think of what may come upon us, but we are in the right, and he who ruleth the Earth and who is King however much the people rage together, he will protect us. He protected our Forefathers, who in the first revolution, a little band of Patriots dared to withstand the hordes which Englishmen sent to subdue them, and though our enemies are greater in number and in resources than we, we have truth on our side and truth must prevail.
        Recruiting officers are all around the country, it is humbling to see them reeling with intoxication, and urging with profane tongues the cause of liberty and independence, yet these mean instruments must be tolerated for the great end which we have in view. Mother's half brother, Horace Holton, is serving at Ft. Morgan.
        Father went to New Orleans Tuesday, he will not return until Saturday night. Mr. John Green spent the day here Sunday, and took dinner with us on Tuesday.
        The cleaning is still going on up at our place, Willie's negro men are getting out sills; The place looks more beautiful to me every time I go up there, which is about once every two day.
Sunday, April 21st--
        Father returned last night, he is looking very well, but is not so bouyant as when he went down; truly it is a blessing to be allowed to spend our life in those quiet shades, especially during such troublous times as these, bitter indeed must be that spirit which away from the haunts of men with the never ceasing hymn of the forest swelling, and softening around, is not soothed out of all but the rememberance of sorrow, how the hush of the Sabbath has fallen on everything, even the birds sing in subdued strains so as not to interrupt the beautiful
harmony which the wind makes in the tops of these lofty trees; war with all its unutterable horrors is half forgot as I sit quietly in my little room, and my heart swells with thankfullness for our blessings, not the less intense because it is subdued by the thought that God stands this day the God of battles and the dispenser of justice, and that our only reliance is upon him; in these quiet moments when Faith triumphs over unbelief I can truly say "thy will be done Oh Lord", I feel that God rules justly and mercifully.
        A very sorrowful accident happened yesterday to a man who was getting out timber for Uncle Moses, a large limb lodged in a tree, and fell upon this man, as he was walking under it, crushing the bones in shoulder and injuring his head so severely that he died in less than an hour. Willie and Uncle Moses have gone to see him buried this morning, they say he is a lone man, without friends or relatives to care for him; but a few short months ago Willie himself narrowly escaped a death so sudden and so painful, can he ever cease to thank God for his goodness?
        Virginia has seceded, General Scott has resigned his position as commander in chief of the United States Army and tendered his services to Virginia (his native state). Tennessee has offered us troops, the requirements of President Davis have been fully met by the Confederate States; our people have determined to fight to the last and lastly we have right and Liberty on our side, if war must come we are prepared to meet it. Father says if he were a younger man he would have been among the first to offer his services to the government, as it is, if the North prosecutes her madness, so far as to enter our country, of course he will enroll; who knows what may be before us, but whatever comes, it is woman's lot to wait and pray; if I were a man--but I am not; my spirit of ten makes me chafe at the regulations which it is right a
woman should submit to and I will not encourage it by giving way to vain wishes and vauntings "if I were a man".
Friday April 26th--
        This is one of my dark days, one in which I feel the the burden of humanity pressing too heavily to be borne; the future looks threatening, the present is clouded with doubt, and uncertainty; our country is in turmoil and danger, and our family seems like a ship floating upon a troubled sea, with no particular destination, no particular interest in any thing, only to keep afloat. I know I am doing wrong, I know I am murmuring when I should be thanking God for his blessings to us, for are we not fed and clothed and sheltered safely, are not we an unbroken household band, Mother, Father brothers and sisters all are here; but oh I am so weak so wicked, I struggle against it but cannot overcome; when when shall I learn to trust Providence, when shall I cease to care about the disappointments of this world.
        Father returned in safety last night, there is no news, except that General Scott has not resigned, nor does he intend to.
        Father went to Monroe this morning. The Mississippi is rising, great fears are entertained of an overflow.