Saturday, July 9th. / '64.
        It has been nearly two weeks since I have written here, two very busy weeks they have been to me. Mrs. Bowmar Barr has been with us since Saturday, she came out to spend the night and next day, but we persuaded her to stay until her husband came, she expected him Tuesday but he did not arrive here till this morning. They expected to leave this evening but it is raining now and probably they will not leave; this is such a refreshing shower, such a grateful smell comes up from the thirsty earth, for though we have a shower almost every day the sun is so hot that it soon dries the
ground. I have rarely felt a more oppressive month than the past June has been. I received a note from Mrs. Morancy last Monday saying that Julia was very ill and had had a congestive chill. Mr. Barr's protracted absence made us very uneasy, but we were relieved this morning by hearing that Julia was convalescent, and expected soon to be able to come down to see us.
        Mr. Gordon came out today to have his horse shod, he expects to go to Georgia in two weeks. Father thinks something of going with him, we would miss him dreadfully but I am anxious for him to go, I know the trip would improve his health and spirits, and then if he went I should be certain of hearing from Valeria once more.
        Mother expects to leave for her excursion into the country on Wednesday; Eva had another chill a few days ago, but kept off the next by taking quinine. Loring's health is still bad and his chills return often, he and Willie went up the river this morning, Willie was going up on a flat boat for government corn, and Lory begged to go with him, and as Mother thought it might do him good she consented, they expect to be gone about a week. I have been suffering much for the past week from boils, today the second one has attained it's maximum, and I am suffering acutely from it, am scarcely able to sit up.
        I finished Mrs. Barr's corsets the first part of the week, although I took a great deal of pains with them I yet feel so sensibly how unworthy they are her wearing that I am timid about sending them. I finished Lewy Stevens hat today and commenced Willie's, but have been too unwell to sew much on it.
        The rain still continues, a delightful summer rain, it cools the air
so much. I heard today that Charley Compton was seriously wounded but had recovered enough to go home. What a sad and thankful rejoicing his arrival will create, wounded, maimed, any way, if only not killed.--
Tuesday, July 12th. / '64.
        After writing the above last Saturday I found my pain increasing so much that in an hour or two afterwards I was obliged to go to bed. I was reading the "Last days of Pompeii," commenced it soon after I came home, and have not yet finished it, and thought this a good opportunity to read some. While I lay there groaning and reading by turns, I heard a great hubbub, and up drove Mrs. Stone, Miss Kate and Jimmy. I was very glad to see them, we were surprised but not very greatly so, as Mr. Barr had told us that they were in Homer and expected to come down the next week. Mrs. Stone looks older, as is natural she should after so much trouble, but she is as loquacious as ever, talks constantly and very cheerfully, with a compliment in almost every sentence, Miss Kate seems just as if she had only gone away yesterday. Jimmy is quite changed, has grown a great deal and is very manly. I like him very much, he has come in to join the army.
        Sunday I rose for breakfast but was obliged to lie on the couch afterwards, and finally to go to bed in much pain, my boil burst about twelve o'clock, which much relieved me. Mr. Scott the President of the western division of this railroad, came in on the stage just before breakfast, spent the day with us, he is a quiet, pleasant gentleman, a little older than Father; he came in on railroad business. Mr. Gordon left soon after breakfast.
        Monday morning we all went into town, Mrs. Stone, Miss Kate and Jimmy
in their conveyance; and Father, Mr. Scott and I in the carriage. I spent the day at Mrs. Stevens', enjoyed the day very much. Mrs. Stevens looks very badly, has been sick in bed seven weeks, is now better and sitting up; Mary does not look very well either. I met Mrs. Copely and her daughter George, a young girl of fourteen, and very vivacious and pretty; called at Mrs. McGuire's on our way home to leave a book and get Mrs. McGuire's clock which Father is going to mend. Mrs. McGuire lent me Madame de Sevigne's letters, for which I was much obliged. Mrs. Stone and Miss Kate went out into the swamp yesterday, they will return in about a week to pay us a visit, Jimmy left this morning. Father is gone in town again today, is a member of the grand jury. Mother leaves tomorrow, is busy getting ready now.
Thursday, July 14th.
        Mother and Eva left yesterday morning, we miss them so much, last night we were very lonesome indeed. Willie and Loring are still absent, and this makes us feel it more, but I am so very busy all day looking after the children and Susannah; our new maid; that I don't have time to be lonely until evening.
        Mother took Rose with her, and the woman that we have in her stead is quite ignorant of her new duties, and requires a great deal of looking after, but she is apparently willing to learn, and does very well.
        Monday night Father brought me a letter from Lois and Grandma, it was dated last April, is the first line we have received from Georgia since
last August, the letter was such a surprise, and we were so glad to receive it, and to learn that they were all well, but Grandma is feeble, and I am now more than ever anxious to see her. Lois did not say anything about Uncle David's family, but I know they were well, else she would have mentioned it, she mentioned the death of two of our old friends. Oh! what changes must have taken place since we left there; I wish now we could hear from Aunt Mary, I cannot imagine why we have not received a letter from her. This one of Lois' came by mail, I shall be able to send an answer to it by Mr. Gordon. Lois says they have heard so many tales about us, one was that we had gone to South America, another that we had gone to Texas, and still another that we had gotten as far as Red river and could not get across; in all these we can see some mirror, or some perversion of our plans at some time.
        The weather is still very warm, this morning it was quite breezy and pleasant, we had a heavy rain Monday night.--
Tuesday, July 19th.
        I have not had a spare minute to write any in my journal until now, and have now only a little time. We were delighted Saturday morning by the arrival of Willie and Loring, they had had a very fatigueing trip, and were glad indeed to get home. Loring has had enough of flat boating, and I am heartily glad of it, for these trips away from home make his manners so rough; however his health has improved, he did not have a chill after he left home and looks so much stronger and better. Saturday morning Georgie was taken with a fever which lasted all that day and night,
his breath was bad and his tongue foul, and I feared very much that he was going to be quite ill, I was so anxious that night that I heard every movement he made, and was often at his bedside. We sent for the Doctor who came Sunday morning and gave him some medicine, he has had no fever since, and is now quite well. John is not very well, suffers from an affection of the bowels slightly. I try to be very careful about his diet, and he is very good to abstain from what he likes best, green corn and melons. To add to my cares Emmeline was taken sick Friday evening, and that night gave birth to a fine boy; deprived of her services about the house, Miss Mary and I have a great deal to do. I never before realized half the care of housekeeping, nor half the trial it is to the patience. I have not borne it very well, have several times been very much fretted, our house is so large, and there is so much sweeping and dusting to do about it, and then we have none of us ever acquired the habit of saving work; it has not been quite a week since Mother left, but it seems to me like months.
        Since Emmeline is sick I have to wash and dress George and John every evening, the little fellows are gone out this evening to get a book Mrs. Leighton promised to lend me, I have hardly time to read it now; the children sometimes irritate me, but I always feel so sorry for having given way to any tempers, and cannot bear them out of my sight.
        We were pleasantly surprised Sunday by the arrival of Julia Barr and Miss Shawlie Creath. Miss Shawlie left that afternoon but Julia remained with us. I was very glad to have her, we were so lonesome, and it seems so pleasant and homelike to have her with us. I was sorry to see her leave this evening, she went for a short visit over on the Bayou with Mrs. Dortch
will only stay a few days. Mrs. Dortch and Mrs. Leighton were here this morning; I think I shall like Mrs. Leighton very much. I have heard her called stiff, but to me there is nothing at all stiff or unsocial about her. Yonder come the children, I must go and meet them.
Wednesday, July 27th.
        Mother returned yesterday, we were almost wild with joy at seeing her again, but neither she nor Eva are improved as we had hoped to see them, Eva had two chills while she was gone. I am in hopes that coming home may cure her, as going away would not. Mother returned with a very bad nervous headache, probably arising from fatigue, it is not well today, but is better. I received a letter from Mrs. Barr which gratified me much, and which brought tears to my eyes, also a long and affectionate letter from Mrs. Morancy, and an equally long one from Mattie Newcomb full of sentimental expressions.
        Juila Barr spent Monday night with me, went over to Mrs. Dortch's yesterday evening; we were agreeably surprised by Miss Kate Stone's return last night, she has not yet heard from her Mother, came out with Mrs. Templeton, (the lady whom she was visiting) who brought her daughters out for Dr. Temple to operate on their teeth. Kate is going back with them to meet Jimmy, who has now joined Harrison's command, and gone in to the river on a raid.
        Willie returned home Monday morning, was of course very much tired, but was obliged to leave yesterday just after dinner to be gone a month, to haul corn down to Columbia. Oh, I would be so glad if he could get out of this quarter master's department, but there seems to be no prospect
of that, but why cannot I patiently wait upon the working of that Providence which has never aught but blessed me.
        George and Loring had such a narrow escape last Friday evening, they had driven down to Mrs. Lidwell's for some apples, leaving me at Mrs. Dortch's, and as they were starting back Nelly, (the mule) started off at a rapid pace, which frightened Lory, he checked her and then got out of the buggy to lead her along, but on reaching her head she became alarmed and galloped off, and George commenced to scream loudly. Loring held on to the bridle for some little distance but finally let go, and the mule dashed right on over all that rough road, and came round the corner. We heard Georgie's screams, and I at once thought of him and Loring, we all ran towards the fence and saw the mule galloping rapidly on with poor little Georgie alone in the buggy. Not knowing what was become of Lory I was dreadfully frightened, but was soon relieved, Alick Dortch caught the mule by jumping out in front of him. The worst effect of the affair was that in running rapidly, with Johnny Dortch in her arms, Miss Laura Barnes had tripped and fallen, spraining her arm badly; there was no one else hurt, except that the next day poor Lory was very much tired from running so fast, and from excitement, and was confined to his couch almost all day.
             The weather has been very cool for several days, the mornings are absolutely unpleasantly chilly, but this evening I feel almost suffocating though it is only the stillness of the atmosphere that is oppressive, it is quite dry and we are needing rain very much, we had a promise of it today but it passed off with only a shadow of a sprinkle. I am quite engrossed with "doctoring" Mollie now, she has the "big head" I have found out, and
Mr. Wynne has given us a recipe for curing her; take of old rancid, very rancid, bacon, enough fat to make a pint and a half of grease, try it out and then put in a bunch of wormwood as large as you can clasp one hand around by holding it tightly, simmer over a slow fire until the wormwood is completely exhausted of it's virtue, then squeeze the remainder out and stir salt in the liquid until it is quite thick, this nauseous compound is to applied freely to the swelling on both sides of the head, and then ironed in with a blanket or other woolen cloth laid over the parts. I have performed this operation two mornings now, it is to be done nine mornings in succession, when she will be cured (?). My beautiful pet is completely disabled, it is quite painful to ride her. Mr. Gordon came out here last Wednesday evening to see Father, the "Rob Roy" the Yankee boat has come up again but could not come to Monroe on account of the low water. Mr. Gordon wanted to go down there and father and he went down together on Thursday, we had a very early breakfast and they left here a little after six; it was a very busy day to me, as I had the pantry, hall and parlour thoroughly scrubbed and washed that morning, we deferred supper till late. Mr. Zuber's boy came in to get some water, and as his master was camping up at the gate I sent out for him to come in and take supper and spend the night with us, he came to supper but left about eleven o'clock, saying that he must go to look after his wagons. Miss Mary was very sleepy and lay down on the outside of the bed, but I sat up reading "Des Confidences" by Lamartine and afterwards my bible until nearly one o'clock, when I thought it was useless to wait longer and went to bed, not without some anxious thoughts about Father. The first thing I did on waking was to go and look in his bed, and felt a pang of
disappointment on seeing it spread as usual; he came about two o'clock Friday, fatigued to death, having ridden thirty two miles that morning, he had found the boat much further down the river than he had anticipated and had deliberated a long time about going on, had thought of coming back to let us know, and then going all the way back again, but Mr. Gordon had been unwilling for him to take all that ride, he had concluded finally to go on, I am sure I would have been very sorry had he taken all that ride back just on our account. Father did not go aboard of the boat at all, Captain Griffin had come on shore to see him, but would not say certainly whether or not he had anything for him. Father said he could probably have gotten the things by hanging about the boat, but that he would not bend himself one iota for all that its lading, which I am glad and proud to know.
             Julia Barr says Mr. Ludeling brought up a great many things for himself and his immediate friends, and she says she heard that Captain Griffin told some friends that he had Mother's things and she should get then before he left. I cannot write any more now; am going dam to Mrs. Dortch's to see Julia, and then to Mrs. Temple's with Kate to call on Mrs. Templeton and daughters, and invite them here, and then Kate and I are going to Mrs. Scarborough's to sit up with her two little boys who are dreadfully ill with the diptheria, and who are at the point of death. We were there this morning, it is a heart rending sight, the poor little sufferers and the anguish of their fond parents who have but three children, one a little baby girl only three months old. When I came home to dinner I thought of the contrast in the two families so near each other, I looked with trembling thankfullness on my two little brothers just about the same age, and remembered that Mrs. Scarborough's children were strong and well like these only last week.
Saturday, July 30th.
        John has been quite sick, we were very anxious about his yesterday, he was taken Thursday night and early the next morning we sent for the doctor, he pronounced his attack bronchitis, he had a high fever yesterday, but today is better and is playing about though very taciturn and languid, he is very hoarse and has a bad cold but has improved so much since morning that I hope by tomorrow he will be quite well. George also has a bad cold. Both of Mrs. Scarborough's children died Wednesday night, the youngest one in the afternoon. Kate Stone and I were there when the oldest one died, oh it was dreadful to think of those poor parents with one little figure lying cold and shrouded and the other insensible, breathing his last, his dying was long and painful. The Father's grief was terrible, the Mother had left the bedside, unable to view her darling's suffering and when his Father in an agony of grief tore himself from his almost lifeless boy, we could hear their groans and sobs as they mounted together in the adjacent chamber. As I saw the fearful change come over the face it seemed to me I could live and see it on one of my own dear ones. Oh God, it is terrible, and then to see the lifeless body, to think where has the spirit gone, there it was certain this little suffering soul is now an angel in heaven, but we cannot be thus sure of those who have lived to manhood's years. My darling brothers, rather would I now see you on the bier than to think that in future years you may die without the grace of God and leave Earth in uncertainty of gaining Heaven. Mr. Scarborough and all his family left the next day carrying with them the corpses of the little ones for whose health they had come here so lately in strength and rejoicing. Mrs. Scarborough
has her little baby to draw the bitterness out of her Mother's breast, but the poor Father has lost his darling, both his darlings in one night, for him there are none of the softening cares of maternity to lessen his grist. How near death and sorrow can come to us and find us still full of our own petty life. On Thursday Kate Stone and Julia Barr were both here and Mrs. Templeton and her daughters returned in the afternoon, one would never have thought that two coffins had left our house that morning. Mrs. Templeton, her daughters and Kate left yesterday morning, and Julia Barr also went to Mrs. Dortch's, leaving us alone again, we were all too much engrossed about John yesterday to think of anything else. Today I have spent a good deal of time reading Lamartine, am very much pleased with "Des Confidences" but I do not think it so beautiful as his "Voyage en Orient." Jocelyn must have been a transcript of his own soul, I find so many tones like it in these memoirs. I knew when I read it that the authour had lived through such feelings as he describes, else they could never speak to the heart as they do. I don't think I ever read anything which made a more enduring impression on my heart, or which became as much a part of my thoughts, of my soul, as this Jocelyn, often I surprise myself in thinking that he actually lived and sometimes his longings, his words, come to me like they were my own, indeed what young what imaginative soul ever lived without such thoughts such longings as his.
        Just now I came to my window to watch the rising of the storm, which the clouds seemed to promise us, but now it has all passed by. I still hear the sound of distant thunder, but am afraid we shall not have the much needed rain; for three days it has been very warm and sultry, today the heat isoverpowering, and I have felt it greatly, but now a fresh breeze ruffles the trees tops and comes gratefully to my tired frame.