Thursday--January 1st /1863--
        The old year is past and today a new one commences. I feel inclined to look back tonight upon the past year, gone now, with all its duties neglected or performed, all it's faults and all it's virtues and trials overcome, thank God I can believe that I have progressed some during the past year, personally, I have much cause to be thankful. Last year I hoped that another new year's sun would rise upon a nation once more in peace, how different is the truth; we hear today that the Yankees have attacked Vicksburg, both by sea and by land, but been repulsed three times, times with great loss. Vicksburg will stand, it seems impossible for her to fall. The Yankees have attempted to land on the Yazoo but
were repulsed, war is on every side, we hear heartrending accounts from the places where the Yankees have been, it would require volumes to record the atrocities of Butler, alone.
        Miss Mary Compton called here this morning, this evening Mother, Miss Mary, Eva and I went over to Mrs. Dawson's, heard some beautiful singing tram the young ladies. Willie has been away all day for pork, returned with a load tonight and is now busy in cutting it up.
January 3rd--
        We were all very much surprised yesterday by Mr. Dwight's arrival, for although we have been expecting him so long, he had so often failed to come that we began to think of him as a thing of the past.
        Mother went in to Trenton yesterday to see poor Mrs. Bry, Mrs. Cauthorn died the day before New Years, after a long and painful illness.
        It appears that we were misinformed about the conduct of our men in the swamp and that they were surrounded by a greatly superior force and made their escape in a masterly manner.
        It rained all night and is now raining, my room floor is quite wet from a leak, it seems almost impossible to stop it. Willie came home last night in the rain, but no bad consequences ensued from it.
Wednesday Jan'y 7th--
        Yesterday evening we were surprised by a visit from young Robert Smith, he has changed very much since he was here last year, looks pale and sad; poor fellow, he returned home the morning of the day in which his Father died, he did not know of his sickness. He has been in eleven battles, in nine of which he was actively engaged, at last he was wounded in the hand in August, and came home last month on furlough,
his wound has just healed and left his hand a little stiff, he has had the neumonia since he came home, said he would have called to see us when he went on, but was so anxious to get home that he could not stop.
        We hear that Butler has been arrested on a charge of defalcation to the amount of six millions! we are certain that he has been superseded by Banks, who has revoked all the late brutish orders of Butler and invited the citizens to return to their homes. I hope none will return, I am more afraid of the kindness of the Yankees than of their unkindness. We hear also that Seward has resigned.
        Father has not come yet, how I long for his coming.
Jan'y 9th--
        Mr. Smith left Thursday morning, we have not heard from Father yet. The weather is cold and damp. Dr. Temple has bought Mrs. Dwight's place and moved into it; Mrs. Dwight asked Mother, with tears in her eyes to let her remain here for a month, and teach us French and music for her board; of course Mother could not say no, though she would have preferred a different arrangement.
        I spent the day at Mrs. Dawson's Wednesday, it passed away very quickly and pleasantly--
Monday, Jan'y 12th--
        We received a letter from Father yesterday, oh, how glad we were, he wrote on the 21st of Dec. says he cannot possibly get home before the middle of this month, it is almost here now, we may begin to expect him about the last of this week.
        We went to Church yesterday evening for the first time in many months; heard Mr. Goodwin (the new minister) preach, I was not much pleased with his sermon, but as usual found something in it to arouse my
conscience. Willie took Miss Dawson in his buggy, or rather, in Mr. Dwight's, which he borrowed, Carrie Young, Julia Compton, Miss Mary Compton, and Miss Newcomb, and Miss Bennett were at Church, Miss Newcomb and her sister are at Mrs. Young's now.
Wednesday, Jan'y 14th--
        Monday Willie and I went about eighteen miles from here into the country, across the Schuder, as every one says; it is there that Willie has been buying his pork. We went in the buggy and were riding from nine o'clock until after dark, only stopping about two hours and a half; the face of the country is much the same as it in here, but much more thinly settled, we saw five or six very good houses. Took dinner at the house of old Mr. Reynolds, a fine old man, from Georgia.
        Mrs. Seale, Mrs. Morris and Miss Scott spent the day here Monday, I was sorry I was not at home to see them. Miss Newcomb and sister also called to see me in the afternoon; I went over to see them yesterday afternoon but they had gone to Mrs. Compton's.
        Willie went off for pork again yesterday after dinner, has not returned yet. Last night a wounded soldier from Minden stopped, was very well acquainted with young Smith.
Thursday, Jan'y 15th--
        This morning when we rose little Jim, who came to make our fire this morning said "Miss Sarah, it's snowing" I looked out of the window and sure enough there was the white fleecy snow, falling in large flakes, it had just commenced, we could hardly dress for looking at it, none of us had ever seen it in day time before, and we were perfectly delighted with the beautiful sight; it snowed quite steadily for about an hour, but the ground was very wet from yesterday's and last
night rain, and was not whitened except in spots, after breakfast the children had a fine snowballing; it has been snowing, sleeting and raining at intervals all day, and is now dreadfully cold, ice has been forming all day. It was a beautiful sight just after dinner, the sun broke out from as clouds around him, making the snow shine on every twig and branch and every pine tree, while all around the horizon the sky wore a dull, cold, leaden hues that I have never seen before; such a peculiarly snowy and cold sky. We have had few gleams of sunshine today but as I write "the western waves of ebbing day" throw their golden light upon my page, giving promise of a sunshiny day tomorrow.
        Poor little John has a dreadful cold, last night he was very sick, and Mother was afraid he would have the neumonia but he is much better now, though still quite sick with his cold, Mother has kept him in her room by the fire all day.
        I have just finished, answering a letter from Mrs. Yorke, Mr. Smith's sister, in relation to some pork which she wished to sell to Willie.
        Today is the fifteenth, I wonder if Father will come tonight.--
Friday, Jan'y 16th--
        Oh what weather, cold as zero--last night it snowed again but this morning it is too cold to snow, everything, is frozen--the water in pitchers and basins and vases, and all my poor flowers; my poor little Valeria is frozen stiff, I have been pouring cold water on it, which iced on the leaves, now I have it close to the fire, I am afraid it is gone, I would not have given it for all my other flowers.
        The sky is blue this morning and the sun shines brightly on the white and frozen landscape, icicles hang from the houses, and every little twig whitened with snow stands out still and distinct against the bright sky. I must stop writing, for although I am as close the fire
as I can get my fingers ache with the cold. I don't think I ever saw such weather before, the thermometer is at 22°--
Tuesday, Jan'y 20th--
        The cold weather is gone now, but it has left irreparable ravages, my poor geranium and the heliotropes look quite dead, though I hope they will put forth fresh leaves in the spring. Miss Newcomb and her sister have returned home without paying me the visit they promised, they only called here for a few minutes Saturday, I was at Mrs. Dawson's but came home before they left, I was quite hurt at their not coming to see me, but I am afraid I have been again mistaken in my estimate of character.
        I received a long and affectionate letter from Miss Valeria Saturday, that is worth a dozen visits from anyone else.--
        Sunday Willie and Mr. Dwight took their buggies and went into Trenton for Miss Lucy Seale and Miss Amelia Scott, they came out intending to spend a week with me, but were obliged to return as Mrs. Scott's wagons arrived Sunday, and she wished to go to her place beyond Vernon; they spent the night with me, and did not return home until yesterday afternoon; yesterday we sent over for Miss Fannie and Miss Nannie to come and spend the day with us, we enjoyed the day very much, though the weather was very disagreeable, misty, cold and rainy, it cleared up though after dinner, and the sun set clear, but this morning it is cloudy again.
        We heard yesterday that Hindman had been taken, together with four thousand men, I hope it is not true.--
Friday, Jan'y 23rd--
        I went in to see Mrs. Seale yesterday, found her and Lucy at home and spent a very pleasant day, I am afraid I cannot say as much for Loring,
who drove me in, there [damaged text] and he looked very dull. Mrs. [damaged text] [(Rest of page cut off)]
Wednesday Jan'y 28th--
        Miss Mary and I spent the day at Mrs. Dawson's yesterday, when I first went I intended only to stay a few minutes, in fact I went to get some palmetto and to hear Miss Fannie sing La Marseillaise, but Mr. Amos came in before we had been there long, and as he said he should only remain a few minutes, I thought I would remain till he left, then it was near dinner and Mrs. Dawson pressed us to stay, the day passes so quickly, in music, conversation, and books, that I could scarcely believe it when I heard five o'clock strike.
        Miss Mary had a dreadful toothache last night, I thought she would not have any rest, but she went to sleep and awoke this morning quite free from pain. It is quite cold again, we had ice this morning, not in our room, however.
        We heard yesterday that six of the western states had sent delegates to Richmond asking admittance to the Confederacy, I don't know how true it is; I am glad to see them leave the North, but I had rather not have them with us.