Saturday, Sept. 13th
        We commenced school a week ago Monday and have been studying steadily ever since, it seems natural to be in school again, and makes me feel happier. Mrs. Dwight is an excellent french and music scholar, and I am perfectly satisfied with her as a teacher for me; but I am afraid that she is not all I at first thought, and not capable of disciplining the mind of a child. Eva does not understand her studies as she ought to do, and Miss Mary, though she has improved in some
things, needs to have her mind strengthened and excited to think and reason; however, "what can't be helped must be endured", and I must try to make the most of my advantages while I have them.
        It is almost the middle of September, I can hardly believe that winter is so near, yesterday evening the air was really like fall; today it has been warmer. Our house gets on slowly, they are now at work on the pantry, Mr. Axley is making sash.
        Willie commenced making brick about two weeks ago; our chimneys cannot be finished until those bricks are burned.
        Uncle Moses left for Georgia on Wednesday, I spent the day with Aunt Jane. Thursday, at Mrs. Garrett's Miss Sarah Garrett is a very pleasant young lady, I think I should like her very much.
        We have had no rain yet, several times it has clouded up, thundered and lightened and a few drops fallen, but not enough to lay the dust.
        I must close my book now and get ready to go over to Dr. Young's to see Carrie and the Misses Compton; we have so many neighbors to visit that I seldom spend an evening at home, they will soon leave, now that fall is coming on. Willie and I took a ride with Miss Julia and Miss Tabitha Thursday evening, enjoyed it very much, only Miss Julia's pony stumbled and threw her off, but she was not hurt.
        Emmeline had a baby on the 4th--
Wednesday Sep, 18th--
        I have time this evening to write a few lines in my journal, and this is a thing of such rare occurrence that I must not let the opportunity pass. I was very much relieved and rejoiced day before yesterday by a long letter from Miss Valeria, telling me all about their removal from Amite and their journeyings to Sharon Mississippi, again today I
received a letter from her, I cannot express what joy these letters gave me, though they indeed contained some things that saddened it, I cannot bear to think of their discomforts of both mind and body in their present unsettled condition, and then how must they not feel about John and Angus; John is in Longstreet's division, constantly near the enemy, and has been in several battles, though held in reserve; with Angus it has been still worse, poor boy, my heart bleeds for him, he has been sick for eight weeks with, typhoid fever; it is the third serious illness he has had since he left home, is unable to serve and it is extremely doubtful if he can get release or even a furlough! I can sympathize with his family, for though I have not passed through the ordeal, the very thought of Willie's having to suffer so, makes so shudder; then I feel near to Angus too, I always have liked him, he is so frank and lovable.
        We are having good news from the war now, on every side our armies are triumphant and are driving the Yankees from Tennessee, Kentucky, and Virginia, while Vicksburg stands firm, and we hear that the Yankees are dying by hundreds in New Orleans, this last is an awful thing to rejoice over, and yet such the fate of a bloody war and such are the feelings which it engenders, even in the merciful heart of a woman.
        Father left us this morning for Jackson, we do not expect him home until next Wednesday, he is improving very much now, and I rejoice to see that with health he is regaining his spirits.
        Mrs. Wilson moved to the swamp Monday. Fall is already here, I am just beginning to realize that it is the middle of September, we have had no rain yet. Last night there was a very cold drizzle which lasted for about half an hour and then every appearance of a storm, we thought that the ecquinoctial gale was at hand but it passed away in a short
time, today has been clear and very warm, but this evening it is quite chilly, the sky is threatening and we hear distant thunder now and then. Miss Julia Compton spent the day here today, or rather, took dinner here, she and Mother went to Trenton this evening, they have not yet returned; though it, is nearly dark and expect them every moment.
        The work on the house appears to progress more rapidly now, yesterday and today they put up the bookshelves in the parlour, I long for the time to come when we may arrange the books on them, Mr. Axley will soon be done the sash for my room; and the pantry is nearly finished Father said yesterday that he expected to move us downstairs when he returned next week. The clouds are very black, oh! may they bring rain, the earth is parched like a brick, and the dust is over the shoetops.
Monday Sep. 29th 1862--
        We have had two or three good rains since I wrote last, the cloud I spoke of in my last entry did indeed bring rain, a dreadful storm. Mother and Julia Compton were in the whole of it, when they arrived they were of course drenched to the skin; Julia spent the night here, she rather enjoyed her adventure than otherwise, she is a frank, pleasant girl, but not of very great depth of character; one cannot avoid liking her, however, nor can one be ceremonious with her. The whole family arrived yesterday and went up to their place. The weather is now quite warm, last week the mornings and evenings were very cool indeed.
        Friday night two soldiers lodged here, they belong to Wall's Texas legion, company Sunderland braves, cavalry. One of them was but seventeen years old and looked much younger, his complexion was not yet
bronzed by exposure and he had very fair hair and pretty blue eyes, one could almost imagine him some fair maiden in disguise. Mrs. Dwight said to him; "Were not your Parents unwilling for you to leave home so young" he answered "Pa said I was too young to come, but Ma said that I wanted to come, and it was not right to keep me". The other soldier, could not have been more than twenty, but he was the perfect opposite of his companion, large, muscular, with a brown face, jet black hair, hazel eyes, and a slight black moustache, he spoke more than the other, and appeared very intelligent, and well bred, though quite plain. He was very gallant too, and proud of Texas and her soldiers and his company and Captain. A division of the "legion" passed the next morning, before he left he told us of the different companies as they passed, their hurrahs for Louisiana and the ladies were deafening; we said that some of the troops did not hurrah to us though we waved to them. "Ah !" said he "they don't know any, better, there are a great many dutch among them who don't care for anything, I despise them", then, as his company came along he said "See, thats our company, they all take off their hats", and sure enough they did, "there's Capt. Sunderland", added he proudly "see him taking off his cap and hurrahing". He shook hands with us warmly and said, "Ladies, if I survive this war, I shall certainly call again", then mounting his horse he pricked him with his great Texas spurs and galloped off, looking very handsome; his company recognized him while he was standing talking to us, and commenced to shout "hurrah for Ray", "hurrah for Ray", "I should not think they could recognize you from so far", said I, "Oh, yes" he replied, "I am the orderly serjeant and they think a good deal of me".
        Capt. Smith came down here last night, he is going away tomorrow
morning; Father is going to send for salt by him, so Willie will not go. I am so glad, I did not like to think of Willie's being absent so long; they were getting the wagon ready this evening, it seemed strange to see its great white top in our yard; the salt will probably cost Father five dollars a bushel and the hauling of about seventy miles.
        Mrs. Williams will move this week, there will then be none of the summer residents here except Major Bry's family. The good news from the war continues to arrive, we hear of some new feat of arms nearly every day. Longstreet's division has been in nearly all the late battles, I tremble to think of John Ridgill. Mr. Green's company is also in that division, Oh! for peace, but war rather than peace except with perfect independence, and this the infatuated north is not yet willing to give us.
        Miss Mary and I planted some violets on Grandma's grave Friday, they were part of those Mrs. Drake gave us, Grandma used to watch their growth with us, little did she think they would bloom upon her grave; Oh! how constantly we should remember that death is ever near us.