Oakland, June 8th. Wednesday.
        It has been almost a month since I last wrote here and in that time I have been and returned from Homer. I cannot pretend to give anything like a daily record of my visit, it seems to me like I had written it all, and I would have done so had not every hour been filled up with visiting, receiving visits or conversation, except the many hours when an overwhelming weariness of body made one indisposed even for pleasure.
        We left for Homer Thursday evening as we anticipated, went only a few miles and spent the night with a friend and relative of Mattie Newcomb's, Mrs. Lawler, we did not leave there until eleven o'clock the next morning, journeyed on slowly until we came to a fine shady place near an excellent spring, we were hungry and so chose this place for eating our basket dinner. I felt very weak and sick but a little lunch refreshed so very much, we took out our late Yankee papers, read some and talked more, then slept a little and by that time Antony was ready to "hitch up" the mules again. Our evening journey over hill and dale was very pleasant, the day was not too warm, the sun shone brightly, the road was well shaded and we had a company of four young people bound on pleasant journey, what more could we need. Ah youth, what a priceless blessing it is, would that I might be always young! The country through which we travelled was very much like our own immediate neighbour, poor and hilly but few fields and these few generally left uncultivated by the removal of their owners, the houses far between and badly built. Towards sunset we came into a prettier and better country, saw one or two very pretty little houses, came up to Col. Gilson's, one of the few stopping places on the road, it was early, but it was seven miles to the next
stopping place so Willie went in to ask if we might stay all night, they said they had a houseful of sick soldiers, so we yielded of course, and drove on towards Vienna.
        This is one of the poorest, meanest little places I ever saw, there is a so called "Hotel" there, but we had heard such accounts of it that we were by no means anxious to stay. As we drove up the long hill on which Vienna is situated we saw a man leaning on a large bay horse which stood at the side of the road without either saddle or bridle, as we came up he turned a bold face to us and stared right into the carriage, after we passed he turned again and continued his impertinent gaze until we were out of sight, then mounted his horse side wise, and passing us looked again, whistling all the time. We drove up to the only nice looking house in Homer, situated a little back in a garden, the residence of a Dr. Stuart. Willie went in to ask if we could stay all night, a young woman came down the path, evidently expecting an acquaintance. She was dressed in white with flowing sleeves and had on a black silk apron, her arms looked so cold and unfeeling when she said we could not stay, it was now nearly dark, as we turned from the gate we met the same impudent young man, who again gazed at us. In perfect disgust with Homer we drove rapidly through the one little street, by the time we reached the bottom of the hill the moon's pale light shone down on us. We had then four miles to go, we did not mind it much as it was a bright moon light, and went on talking and singing until we saw the friendly lights from Mr. Greens. When we got out of the carriage we were three folorn looking women, I was so tired that I could hardly stand. We went right in through the narrow piazza to the parlor, which was lighted
by some pine knots in the fireplace. Mat and Shep were acquainted with the family, they introduced me but my name was not understood and as the old man took my hand he gave me a keen look from under his heavy black brows and said, "what did they say your name was?" when I told him, he instantly remembered to have met my Father. He is said to be one of the richest men in Jackson parish, or indeed in this section of country, but his surroundings are miserable, the rooms at his house small and dirty, the furniture of the commonest kind; his daughter has been to school and has a very fine piano on which she plays tolerably and she also sings very well. Hanging up on the unceiled wall of her room were some very elegant dresses, on a little table in the parlour were some very handsome books, the fine bindings all spoiled with dirt. The table was furnished with a variety and abundance far superior to ours, but oh so badly cooked and served. I could not bear to drink out of the dingy glasses, and had no appetite for the greasy food handed on a coarse plate; however we were very thankful for the shelter, they were very much crowded but we slept very soundly three in a bed.
        The next day we left as soon after breakfast as possible, we had a delightful days ride through a beautiful hill country, sometimes we would come to the summit of a lofty hill, the road wound red and rough through the green woods an its side, in the valley waved small fields of wheat and rye, glistening green in the sunlight or lying darker in shade of the opposite hill, a little stream ran across the road and beyond the hill rose in terraces, below a wood of oak and hickory with their bright gleaming foliage,
and crowning the summit a ridge of dark pines rising distinct against the clear sky, this sky was a deep blue with light shaded clouds floating in it and casting a transient shade on the smiling landscape beneath. I have described one scene, there were many others almost equally pretty, sometimes the waving grain was exchanged for fields of young corn.
        The road was very rough and much washed into gullys, we were obliged to get out of the carriage and walk down most of the hills. We ate a hearty dinner in the cool shade, and then drove on to Homer, which we reached about sunset. Mrs. Bennet received me with cordiality, I was exceedingly fatigued and was glad when the hour for retiring approached. As usual the first night found me homesick and weary, in the morning we were to go to Church but Churchill's division was passing, the young ladies wished to see it, and we did not go. At dinner a very equisite note came from Mr. Kimball inviting me to go to Church with him that night, or I should have said requesting the pleasure of my company. I accepted, and heard a very good sermon which my weariness prevented my appreciating--
        I was so tired I had to stop just there, and do not now feel like taking up the record again, but must just say how delightful it is to be at home. We only arrived yesterday evening, I have been putting to rights today and now at the twilight hour everything in so pleasant in my room, everything in the garden has grown beautifully, my little flower garden is so sweet, and my dear little geranium so luxuriant. I wrote to Valeria while in Homer, it was a painful pleasure, Mr. Gordon kindly sent the letter to Mr. Cassidy who had promised to forward it.
Thursday, June 9th.
        Sunday evening I went up to Mrs. Barr's, was so glad to see them and met such a warm welcome. I do love Mrs. Barr and Mrs. Morancy, I never knew a lovelier character than Mrs. Barr's. I remained at Mrs. Bennett's a week, while there received a good many calls from different young ladies, took several very pleasant rides. One evening Mr. Kimball called to accompany me, I had a delightful ride, a slight shower had just washed the dust from the trees and we went along a very pretty road, we mutually exerted ourselves to please, and discoursed at large on the beauties of nature, he described several beautiful scenes in the White mountains, and we found some places which we knew in common. I have rarely met a pleasanter companion, but he lacks that indefinable, that subtle essence of manhood without which refinement, culture and taste all leave a visible lack in a man. The strength, the decision and fearless uprightness of a true man, what can equal it?
        We had a little surprise party at Mrs. Bennett's while I was there, about fourteen ladies and more gentlemen were present, the evening passed quickly and delightfully and three o'clock came before departure was thought of, the stars were beginning to fade when I went to rest.
        The next day I went to Mrs. Barr's, spent the day in company with Major Street, he was probably fatigued from the party, at any rate he was very dull. I was enjoying one of my best days, was neither tired nor sleepy. That week at Mrs. Barr's was one of great enjoyment to me, it is delightful to be with those who never offend the taste by any lack of refinement, towards whom the heart goes out in perfect trust and love, such are Mrs. Barr and
Mrs. Morancy to me, I have but one dearer friend than they, this dearest and best I need not speak her name; my love, my life, the memory of the dead is linked with hers, when I can see her again I shall have no concealments. I have never gone to her and not met with the fullest love, the most perfect sympathy. I wrote her a long letter at Mrs. Barr's but oh! how poor and powerless is a letter when one has a whole year to speak of, and such a year as this has been to me.
        While at Mrs. Barr's we borrowed "Shirley" from Mattie Newcombe, I read it aloud, some parts of it spoke so to my heart that I seemed to breathe out myself in reading them. The book has some great imperfections but I like it very much for all that. Mrs. Bowmar Barr left with her husband for Monroe the day after I went there, she is now here, has been staying with Mother ever since she came down, her baby in a very pretty and good little fellow.
        I was much more pleased with Julia while at Homer than ever before, she is not a friend in that high sense in which the word should only be used, but her many good qualities make me like her in spite of the prejudices which were engendered by her surface faults. The day after I expected Father and Miss Mary I received a note from her saying that as Father was coming from Millhaven with one of the mules he was going to drive to Shreveport, the mule kicked up and struck Father with his hoof on one side of the nose, breaking the bone and cutting a great gash, she wrote that Father was getting much better and would be up soon, that his principal trouble was about my disappointment and a fear of my being anxious about him. I was indeed quite anxious but the next day, Friday, as we were sitting reading
after dinner, the ambulance drove up with Father and Miss Mary. I was so glad to see them, and rather was very much better though I was shocked at the swollen appearance of his nose, and the dreadful gash all down one side of it, what a mercy that he was not struck on the temple or in the eye, it just escaped his eye. Father remained at Mrs. Barr's until the next morning, when he left for Shreveport and Marshall, Mr. Gordon was with him. Mr. Gordon told me that he had heard that Mr. Ridgill had removed either to Demopolis or Selma. Mr. Tom Williams, a gentleman from Homer was going across the river and I wrote two notes to Valeria, one at each of the above places and a letter to Grandma and Aunt Mary. Miss Mary and I went down to Mrs. Bennett's Saturday morning and remained till Monday. These two days were by no means pleasant, Saturday morning I spent in writing letters and was very much worried about Willie. In the first place I was worried about his being at Homer and having nothing to do, and in the second I thought I saw too much preference for Shep Bennett in his manner, this combined with my physical weariness caused the day to be anything but pleasant to me. I am so weak hearted, and place so little real Faith in God, that I am often needlessly troubled, with a few days these transient clouds dispersed. Willie had been ordered to remain in Homer until particular orders could be received from Col. Harrisson, but was very much in hopes he would obtain leave to return the negroes to Father and himself join his company. I had reason too to believe that his transient fancy for Shep had subsided. But other causes of trouble remained far more deeply seated. I find myself a second time disappointed in Mattie Newcomb, I easily deceive myself and so slow of comprehension, when she was down here I thought I
could really respond to the liking which she so warmly professed. I have no doubt that she in sincere in these expressions, if I had I would not mind it so much, but it is impossible for me to count her among my intimate friends, she is so shallow, her sentiment is of such a technical surface kind, she sometimes offends my eye and ear by her manners or language, and seems so wanting in religious feeling or in any of the deepest feelings of our nature; she is not without many good qualities, not without affection, but there is throughout a lack of depth and discrimination that makes it impossible for us to mingle intimately. I like her very well as an acquaintance, but she speaks as if we were intimates, she seems to desire it, and her own expressions seem to have left me in some sort pledged to her, if I break this intimacy shall I not myself seem to have been acting a hypocritical part? I cannot tell her I feel deep friendship for her, yet what can I say when she tells me so? But let me leave the speculations for more apparent facts.
        The week of Miss Mary's stay was divided between Mrs. Barr's and Mrs. Bennett's, we spent one day with Mrs. Scarborough, I had been twice to see them before, was very glad to meet them again. Tabitha is as kind as ever but her face has taken a still more pensive cast and her girlish beauty is much impaired. I am afraid her married life is not happy, her husband is an inferior man in every respect, and is besides, a gambler. I do not see how she can either love or respect him. On Saturday evening we were delighted by seeing Father again, he and Mr. Gordon spent the night at Mrs. Bennett's. Father was very much fatigued, his nose was much improved but one his eyes was badly inflamed. The next morning we all went to Church, the sermon was not good, and it was excessively warm. Father and Mr. Gordon dined at Mrs.
Barr's and spent the night there, we went up to tell Mrs. Barr's family goodbye in the afternoon, a rain came up on our return but the curtains of the ambulance were down and we did not get wet. We had a delightful rain that evening, it was very much needed and everything and everybody rejoiced in it.
        Monday morning we left as soon as we could on our way home. It was a cloudy morning and when we had gotten about three miles we had quite a little shower, about an hour afterwards the rain commenced again and just poured down, it drove steadily against us, soon the gullys at the side of the road were full of roaring streams, here and there we saw a perfect waterfall, while the road was just one sheet of water flowing on in waves, of course our progress was extremely slow, I did not get wet much, Miss Mary and I were safe except our dresses which got a little wet and very much tumbled. Father was quite dry too, but Mr. Gordon and Jerry were the sufferers, they sat in front and although Mr. Gordon had a blanket over his knees he got quite wet. Before twelve o'clock the rain ceased and when we found a good place we stopped to eat dinner, in an hour or two we started again and plodded slowly on, it was yet more than an hour before sunset when we came to Mr. Green's, the next stopping place was eight miles on, but Miss Mary and I had such a distaste to stopping at Mr. Green's again that we went on. About a half mile on we met Maj. Waddill, he was going up to Homer to meet his wife, but when we told him that she was not there he said he would not go on but would probably come back to Mr. Gibson's after a short business interview with Mr. Green, so we went on slowly. It was almost sunset when we reached Vienna, Mr. Gordon took the reins and
drove as fast as possible. The dark fell before we reached Mr. Gibson's, it was cloudy and not a star shed "quivering light" upon our uncertain way. Miss Mary and I began to regret not having stopped at Mr. Green's, at length the lights from Col. Gibson's shone through the thickening darkness. Maj. Waddill drove up almost at the same time with us, said he would not impair Father's chances of a lodging by going in at the same time. Father descended from the ambulance with many exhortations from us all to be very eloquent, notwithstanding this his errand was unsuccessful, he said we might stay if it were not for the young ladies, so of course we had to drive on. Maj. Waddill was accepted, we left him standing in the dark with "I regret exceedingly, ladies" on his lips. The next mile was over the muddy, rough road in the dark, Jerry got out and walked ahead, to find the bad places. At length we came to the next inhabited place, the lights burned faintly, our suspense was dreadful while Father held a parley which we could not hear. What was our relief when we heard the welcome words, "Gordon drive up here," so up we drove guided by the voice, the people were all gone to bed, the gentleman of the house came out with a lantern by which light we descended and walked up the short path to the house. I never was so grateful for a night's shelter in my life, I was tired to death and when the young lady showed us into a little room with white curtains to the one window, and a white counterpane on the plump bed, I could not help giving vent to my gratitude. There was a nice little white basin and pitcher and linen towels, the room was only about twelve feet square but everything was so nice that Miss Mary and I were enchanted. We had soon stretched our weary limbs and were fast asleep. The next morning we had a very good plain
breakfast, everything neat. The young lady of the house was quite a nice intelligent person, and her Mother and Father were very kind, they were very moderate in the charge, only asked ten dollars for us all, and the mules were well fed, we were glad that we had not stopped at Col. Gibson's which we hear is not a good place. I forgot to say that Mr. Gordon lost his mule at Greenwood, not far from Shreveport, it was very unfortunate, but very fortunately they found a man in Shreveport who had a horse he wanted to send to Monroe, so Father put him in beside the other mules. At Mr. Mayfield's (where we stopped all night) Jerry lost his knife, which is a negroe's greatest treasure, he was very such distressed about it. After we started we found that he had had no breakfast and Father took out our lunch basket to give him some ham and bread, we had had a large piece of cake in it, but when I lifted the towel which should have contained it there was none there. At first I suspected Father and Mr. Gordon of having taken it for supper, but they looked so innocently surprised that we had to suppose some negro had pilfered it, everything else in the basket was all right, as Jerry munched his bread and meat he muttered, "bad luck, Mule lost, knife lost, cake gone, pipe lost and like to turn over, don't like to travel." We all laughed heartily at his enumeration and concluded that poor Jerry was, next to Mr. Gordon, the greatest sufferer by the trip. Father, it is true, had broken his nose, but flesh will heal. We arrived at home by three o'clock, were so glad to get here again, the house looked so large and the parlour had such an elegant air to our eyes, while I felt quite lost in the hall. We found Mr. and Mrs. Barr still here, Mr. Beck and Miss Mary had been to pay Mrs. Barr a visit, just left last week, I was
so sorry I could not have seen Miss Mary. Eva had been very sick with the chills and looked quite pale, Mother said she was so weak she could not hold up her head and Miss Beck nursed her like a sister. Loring too has had the chills since I left, he looks badly, but George and John are as well as ever, George seems to have grown so much since I left. I shall not commence school until Monday, am anxious for the day to come. It has been showery both yesterday and today, and quite warm, this weather makes everything grow, my little geranium looks beautiful.
Thursday, June 16th./
        I have been intending to write here all the week but have not had time. Mother was taken with the diptheria Friday evening and has been sick ever since, the doctor cauterized her throat for the last time Tuesday morning, her case was taken in time and was not severe, she has not yet left her room, is still quite weak, but her throat is well.
        Mr. Bowmar Barr and his wife and baby left here Sunday, being afraid of the diptheria for their little one. Mrs. Barr went to Mrs. Dortch's to stay until her husband could get a boarding place for her. Sunday night we were all very tired and retired early. Miss Mary and I had not gone to bed when we heard the steps of two men in the hall, we were slightly startled but they proved to be Mr. Barr and his brother-in-law Mr. Beck. Mrs. Dortch had no room for them and they had come here to stay all night. They remained to breakfast, I liked Mr. Beck very much indeed, he is not at all handsome. Mrs. Barr came to breakfast with her brother, as he was going to return home immediately; she went to Mrs. Stubbs that day, she is going to board there.
 We were surprised by a visit from Capt. Oliver Tuesday, he was on his way to Trenton, "the Post" is at last moving down. Capt. Oliver stayed to dinner, said that Willie would probably be on that night, so we expected him, but went to bed disappointed. I was gladdened the next morning however by hearing from Rose that Willie had come about ten o'clock, I had slept so soundly that his coming was unheard. He brought many loves from everybody, and a very affectionate note from Mrs. Morancy to me. Mother has been very much troubled for fear Willie might have fallen in love with Shep Bennett; I think she has no cause for uneasiness, at one time while in Homer I feared the same, but I hope the fancy was fleeting, she is too old for him, and I don't think she would make him a good wife, perhaps I hope too much for him, it seems to me it would almost break my heart for him to marry her; he has not been very well lately and has become thinner, probably owing to the warm weather. Mr. Newcomb, Mrs. Bennett's oldest son, called yesterday evening, we kept him with us all night, and he and Willie left together after breakfast this morning. Father is not very well today, had an attack of dizziness and could eat but little breakfast, but insisted on going in to Monroe. We don't expect him back till after dinner. It is very warm today, we have not had a shower for two whole days.
Saturday, June 18th.
        I happened this morning to glance at a portion of my journal written soon after the fall of New Orleans; how dark the times were then! and oh how trebly dark there were this winter, but now light has at last dawned and in such a bright promise of a sunlight day, at last the tremulous hope
of peace begins to flutter in our hearts. We hear on every side rumours of victories in the South, of disaffection and open rebellion in the north; we have reason to think that this year something decisive may be done. With prayerful anxiety we expect news from Virginia and Georgia, where our noble veteran troops an contesting hardly for the great cause, the Yankees seem to be hurling all their strength on to crush our noble Virginia army and possess Richmond. We have heard of bloody battles, of brilliant victories, but we know little with certainty, our confidence in Lee has never once faltered, may he prove again victorious!
        We have heard that a resolution has passed the lower house in the Yankee Congress proposing to open negotiations for peace, this is too good to believe. The four years of Lincoln's administration are drawing to a close, we have looked forward to this as affording prospects for peace, and now the state of affairs in the north seem to justify the words of President Davis' last message in which he expresses an opinion that the war will end during the year. Long, of Ohio, has made a speech in the Federal Congress in which he advocates in the boldest and strongest manner that the Confederate States shall be recognized and propositions made for peace. He frankly declares the right of secession, condemns coercion as wrong in principle and effect, and pronounces Lincoln alike a fool and a knave, all this in the forcible, moderate manner which speaks conviction not passion to be the motive of his words, if there were many such man in the Federal Congress our hopes would be assured. From these great national interests which are so absorbing, I descend to the small but to us important events of our own lives.
        Mother left her room for the first time yesterday morning, she is not
yet strong, I am afraid this debility will cling round her all summer. Mr. Gordon came out Thursday evening, remained all night. The next morning Father went down to Millhaven in the buggy, Georgie asked to go, and Father delighted him by consenting. John then came with his petition and to our extreme surprise Father again consented. Loring then put in his plea to go to take care of the two little ones and drive, so Father went off with a buggy full of little boys. John looked so happy and cunning sitting up on the butter bucket. Willie now comes home to his meals and to stay at night, he is having the hands out wood for coals, down at "Camp Qui vive," about three miles from here. I hope he will get out of this business some time or other, he is anxious to leave but I fear something will happen to keep him there. As I write I hear the noise of teamsters driving cotton wagons by; two Yankee boats have been to Monroe, ostensibly to take down the cotton which belongs to Maynard, a frenchman who bought it from the government and paid in government neccessaries, but there is a clique of men about Monroe, composed of Maj. Waddill, Mr. Ludeling, Capt. Crosely and Mr. Barr and some others who are mysteriously intimate on the Yankee boats, and it is strongly suspicioned that they are carrying on some great rascality. Father says that he thinks it would be very well if every citizen were allowed to barter their cotton with Yankees, because then they would pursue their own interest, and get what is more valuable than cotton, but to allow sharpers to thus enrich themselves while honest men are debarred seems very wrong. The second boat has not yet gone down, and there is serious talk of burning it before it leaves.
Monday, June 27th.
        We were delightfully surprised last Friday by Dr. McDonough's arrival, he came while we were at dinner, we were very glad indeed to see him, he and Father went in to Monroe Saturday, the Doctor did not come out till late in the evening. He remained with us yesterday, left this morning immediately after breakfast. I finished plaiting Jenny Morancy's hat Saturday, sent it up today by Berry, one of the negroes who is going up with a wagon train. I am not at all satisfied with the plait, it in not as nice as I have done, but I have been so long out of practice in braiding that it is difficult for me to do it. I am going to commence making a pair of corsets for dear Mrs. Barr this evening, and then I have a hat to sew for Willie and one for Louis Stevens and one for Sandy, after this I hope to be over my press of work for a time.
        Eva has had the chills again, looks very badly, her system is in a low state, she imagines she has the diptheria and many other things. I am very anxious about her health, we have persuaded Mother to take a trip up the country with her, she contemplates leaving in a week or two, both she and Eva need the change. They expect to take Homer, Mt. Lebanon, Minden and Vernon in their way. Loring has also had the chills, but we succeeded in breaking them last week, this morning we had a full school for the first time, all my pupils did themselves credit.
        It is very warm, we begin to need a shower already though it is not more than four days since we had one, we have been very much blessed in showers for the past month; the vegetables are doing well, we had Okra soup today for the first time this summer. One of our heliotropes is
blooming prettily now, my geranium is also doing well, but the ants have eaten up half the bed of portulacca, and I am very much afraid they will trouble my geranium.
        Father has been having the piazza floored in front of the house, it is a great luxury to have it to sit on in the morning and evening, though it is too sunny at this hour, or at any time between seven and six o'clock, it gives quite a different character to the front of the house.
        We hear today of a new victory gained by Lee over Grant, I hope it may be true and I believe it is, we hardly recognize the possibility of Lee's being defeated. I think tremblingly of John and Angus, they must have been in these late battles if Indeed they had not fallen before; Oh that I could hear from them.
Tuesday, June 28th.
        I received two letters by Mr. Newcomb yesterday evening, one very affectionate and welcome from Mrs. Morancy, she tells me that she has at last in earnest commenced to wean Jennie, and that they are both much better for it. I am glad indeed that this is so; Mrs. Morancy also writes that Julia and Miss Creath expect to come down next week. I wish it might be Mrs. Barr and Mrs. Morancy, though I like Julia much better than I used, and shall like a visit from her. My acquaintance with Miss Creath is very slight, and has not left a favourable impression upon me. My other letter was from Mattie Newcomb, written in high flown style of sentiment with hardly a single rational sentence in it, this is grievous to me, I must do my best to preserve my own sincerity untainted. Oh my own dear friend,
if I could only receive one quarter of a page from you how much more precious it would be than a folio of those letters! The fighting is still going on, and my heart is anxious, very anxious and sad. Mr. Barr was here to supper last night, was on his way to Homer, traveled at night on account of the extreme best. The heat of the sun is scarcely bearable, it seems to scorch the blood, in the house it is very warm, it is cloudy today at intervals and we hope for speedy rain, as I write I hear slight, distant thunder.
        Mr. Gordon spent last night with us, on his way from Shreveport, where he had been to get his mule, he succeeded in getting it. Was called upon by the conscript officers, told them he had always been willing to go into the army, and would go anywhere if they would not conscript him, they promised to write to him when they wanted him. He has a natural deformity, one of his hands is imperfect, and this has prevented him from being in the army.