Monday, Nov. 2nd. 1863.
        It is now indeed winter, though the weather is less wintry than we had last month, true to it's character the first of November was chill and misty, this morning it is very warm, but cloudy.
        Willie came home Saturday evening, spent Sunday with us, he leaves again this morning. We have hopes of getting the books and piano again soon. Mr. Gordon was here yesterday, wanted to get some iron from Father, made an arrangement with him to bring our things, it will be so pleasant to have them again, we miss the books especially.
We had a frost Friday night which killed the heliotropes out in the garden. I cut them down and covered the roots, the large one had such a thick stalk, it was like a little tree.
Tuesday, Nov. 3rd.
        I am at home today for the first time since we returned, I feel the full thankful home feeling, my beloved hillside speaks to my heart today for the first time and wakes a warm, trembling throb of joy, the old meaning which has lain asleep so long that I feared it was gone forever has wakened and once more everything looks familiar and dear, there is my beloved pine standing clear against the deep blue sky, there is the delicate tracery of the more distant oak tops, and the little vista of brown trunks opening through a space between the sweet gum and the hickorys, the young straight hickorys are indeed yellow with autumn leaves and many a sere one has fallen at their feet, but what matter, I shall see again spring's delicate buds, I shall again watch spring expand into summer, on this same hillside from this same western window if God wills--and today I feel so humbly happy that it seems to me I can always bow to his will. I know I shall not always be thus submissive, but let me thank Him for his grace while I enjoy,--when temptation comes I must pray. Miss Mary has gone to her music lesson this morning and my little pupils finished their lessons early and learned them perfectly, without a word of reproof, this I know is the secret of my happy mood, and the humility comes from a recollection of Father's perhaps unmeant reproof, it was good for me, it touched a sore point, I shall now look better into my heart and be more careful that I do no set myself up as better than
others. Oh this warm, bright sunshine, the clear blue sky and the white clouds floating over it, and through the open window comes the rustle of the leaves, the hum of insects and the occasional chirp of the bird, all those low, bright sounds which come with the sunshine and the breeze of a warm autumn day, with them comes in my heart a thousand ecstatic, undefined thoughts and feelings, it is in such hours as these that we realize what happiness may be, it is then that we feel life, life in its sense of full and perfect being, not its varied cares and hopes and aims which are called forth by our social life; life as the free existence of an individual, ah the very consciousness of such a life is fraught with a sense of joyous freedom. Nature is well called our Mother, what a close delightful union exists between nature and human feeling, nature always reaches my heart.
Monday, Nov. 9th.
        I arose very early this morning, about half past four o'clock, was very sleepy at first and shuddered to leave the warm bed, but I felt glad of it afterwards, I had finished bathing, and was dressed in my warm wrapper and had a quiet hour to myself when Father called me to look at the moon, the whole place was asleep, and overhead the stars shone bright in the solemn morning heaven, the moon, a silver thread, shone in the eastern horizon and high above glowed Venus so brilliant yet mild in her beauty, she was the fairest gem in the heavens, but my heart gave a bound of joyous recognition as I walked into an open space between the trees and saw glorious old Orion just before me, what a beautiful constellation it is and being the first one I learned, it seems like a familiar friend, there too were all the well known winter constellations, Sirius and Procyon and the pretty little triangle
in Argo Novis were near Orion in the south, the sickle or Leo glittered nearly on the meridian, Capella in the west and the twins, and below them the Pleiades and Aldebaran. while in the north Casseiopeia was setting and the brilliant pointers showed the polestar, hundreds of smaller stars were sowed over the heavens, but Venus was the queen of them all, she glowed and brightened to the eye not like a star but resembling the moon in it's mild radiance. I came in for a few minutes, and than went out to watch the stars pale one by one and disappear till only Sirius glimmered with scarcely distinguishable light, and Venus grew faint above the moon which seemed to dissolve in the rosy, golden glow of the advancing dawn. I thought of the lines, "Friend after friend departs" . . . . "Thus star by star declines, till all are past away, As morning higher and higher shines, To pure and perfect day." Who can thus watch the fading stars without such thoughts, the sadness and gloom faints before the triumphant brightness of the glorious King of day, then the heart rejoices in the remembrance of the Sun or Righteousness which here we see only darkly, but hereafter shall rise in dazzling brilliancy. The winter sun rises late, and I waited only to see the pyramidal glow diffuse itself over the whole heavens, and to find myself growing cold and weary of my position. I returned to the house with my heart full of the freshness of the morning, and strengthened for the day before me, when I again left my room for breakfast the red disc of the sun was just appearing behind the trees and I watched it until my eyes were so dazzled I could hardly see to read Thompson's dawning and sunrise, a scene so true and so beautiful.
        It was Wednesday I think that we were surprised by a visit from Willie,
he came up with Mr. Gordon, who left on the stage that evening, he went to turn his wagons back for our piano and books, they will be here now in two or three weeks. Willie was back again Friday night, came to see Mrs. Willson on business; she has at last decided to go to Texas, will try to leave today. We have bought all her stock and sold her two teams. Willie rode up yesterday just as we were going to breakfast, spent the day with us, was obliged to go back in the evening, for Mr. Duvall was away at Mr. Putnam's. We walked down to see Mrs. Willson yesterday evening, found them in the last stages of packing, we know well what that is, everything to do and the heart sick and head weary. Julia was busy at work, looked very badly, pale and hollow eyed, Mrs. Willson was suffering from a headache, could scarcely open her eyes but was as amiable, gentle voiced as ever, with her yellow hair smooth and her mourning dress perfectly neat in its arrangement. I feel so much for them, they are to start this morning and must now be sick, the sad hour, the hour of our departure is present to me now, its hard sorrow, and its future of danger and uncertainty; and yet now we are quiet at home again; how unaccountable are the workings of feeling, I grieved to leave home, I grieved to return, and now that I can once more feel the grateful joy of being at home, I still sometimes regret with such intensity that we could not have continued our journey, now and then there comes a vague, unacknowledged wish for the strangeness, the freedom, the adventure of our unfinished journey, or of any journey like it into an unknown land. But this is only now and then, I thank God for this peaceful asylum, for all those dally cares and daily joys which little as they make up the sum of our life below, to build, to sow, to plant, and
till that we may next year reap the fruit of our labours, to watch the leaves fall with the hopeful thought that we shall see those same trees bud again, these are pleasant things; my daily duties are little things, to teach line upon line, some days to be cheered by the hope that I have benefited, others to be cast down with the thought that my work is useless, to endeavor to improve my own mind and my life, and to succeed in learning how little an idea I have of the knowledge others have toiled to gain, and to penetrate day by day deeper into my own heart, drawing thence some little sparks of good to cheer me, but seeing Oh so much uncharitableness, so much selfishness and ingratitude; thus are my weeks and months chequered even amid their seeming monotony, and I hope that I shall some day struggle into more strength, greater purity. I read yesterday in Pilgrim's progress the parable of the two husbandmen, one of whom sat down in dispair in his overgrown farm; the other weeded the fields little by little, every day removing a stone, and at length his whole farm was clear, and smiling with abundant harvests, and then I turned to my little note book and read from Thomas a Kempis, "If every year we rooted out one fault we should soon become perfect men."
Monday, Nov. 16th.
        The week that has past since I last wrote has been a long one and very eventful to us. Miss Mary and Loring went in town on Monday, and as Eva was not very well we did not have any school. Mrs. Mays came to spend the day. In the evening Willie rode up accompanied by his substitute, it is a hard word for me to write, harder still for me to think of. Michael
Fry to his name, from one of the border states of Germany, a strong, stout man, accustomed to exposure and hardship, his price is ten thousand dollars in money, a horse, saddle and bridle, and to provide a house and bread stuff for his family during his absence, it is a high price to pay but a little one to receive when one is going to a life of peril and hardship only for the price. The surgeon here expressed himself well pleased with the man, but the papers had to go to some higher officer from whom they returned the other day with the endorsement, "no more substitutes received except in case of the sickness or disability of the party procuring them," this is ridiculous for it is only those well qualified for the army that need a substitute, Col. Harrison said it was an assumption of power and advised Father to write to Kirby Smith about it. I sometimes think I have false ideas on this subject, and that Willie is perhaps doing his duty better by remaining to assist Father who so much needs him than by going into the camp where he would not assist our country any more, but still I cannot help feeling it as a stain, a cause for blushing, that he should have a substitute. Oh, if we had only got to Georgia! but then a greater sorrow might have come upon us. I ought to be resigned, and yet I cannot be. It seems to me I am getting more and more irritable and unhappy. The children, try me so much, I could be happy if I thought I was doing them any good. Friday Mother, Father and Miss Mary went to town and George had a chill, so I had only Lory and Eva in school. I tried to teach them with as much gentleness as possible, but Lory yawned and made faces and would not read, and at last fell into a fearful passion. I have never seen any one like him when he does so, which he does quite often, he raged and trembled
and almost foamed, I could not control him at all, but at last succeeded in making him finish reading, though I almost had to tear the words from his mouth. I could not help being provoked with him. It is so hard when I do all I can to be told that he hates to look at me, and to hear me talk, and wishes there was never a book written, and that he would rather be dead than have to come up in that room with me every day. After he got over his reading he did the rest very well, and was in good humour before he left, but I cannot improve him any while he is subject to such rages, and when they went down stairs I was perfectly weak and lay down by little Georgie to weep passionately. I was so dissatisfied with myself, and so sorry to have given way to my temper. This morning again Loring was so bad, not only to me but to his sisters that I thought it my duty to tell Mother, though I did after a struggle. I don't know what I ought to do, I suppose he will hate me at last, but it cannot be right for me to give him up to this terrible temper, if he does not learn to control it he will be miserable, through life.
        Mary Stevens and Mrs. Harrison, her cousin, dined with us Friday, they came by in the morning on their way to Dr. Temple's to have Mrs. Harrison's teeth worked on, and did not get back to dinner till late, their visit was so pleasant that it made me almost forget the morning but at night the recollection came back. Oh if I could be assured that I doing right, that the end will be for good I could bear the present trial, but sometimes I think it would be better for me to let Loring alone altogether.
        Mr. Seale set out for Arkansas on Monday, he is to buy flour and grain and salt for us. Dr. McDonough took tea with us Thursday, Willie was also
here, it was the twenty third anniversary of Father's and Mother's wedding, and also Father's fiftieth birthday. The weather is now cold and clear, the ground is strewn with fallen leaves and those that still hang on the tress are brown and withered. Mr. Bowmar Barr called Wednesday and left a letter for me from Mrs. Morancy, it was affectionate but very sad, they are still in Homer but think of going to Minden. This morning we heard two volleys of shot, probably over the graves of some of the dead soldiers, the hospitals are nearly opposite, one above, one below us, several have died since we returned, Dr. McDonough says mostly from imprudence after they are convalescent; they came for our ambulance to send two home for burial. Poor fellows! they have no comforts, and few necessaries for the sick room, the Dr. says he is ashamed of their hospital equipments, it makes me sad sometimes to think how we have every comfort and are in health, while just over the road men are dying or languishing with but a pallet to lie upon, where they have no room to turn themselves, and once they had no candles, Mother gave them some to light a poor man to death. This courier we have here said yesterday, "A good many poor fellows over yonder are getting long furloughs," long furloughs indeed, and the saddest part is many of them are not going home.
Wednesday, Nov. 18th.
        Mr. Gordon came back last night but I suppose it will be a week before the wagons arrive. I am getting on a little better in school, yesterday Miss Mary went to her music lesson but the others were in school and did very well indeed. George took quinine and missed his chill; he has had but
three, and yet he looks pale and thinner already.
        Father went on a shopping excursion yesterday, bought a piece of very pretty plaid linsey for twelve dollars a yard! and some other woolen stuff for seven, he brought home a piece of bleached cotton for Mother to look at, it is coarse and very thin, price nine dollars per yard! The cheapest thing was a paper of needles only a dollar and a half.
Thursday, Nov. 26th. 1863.
        My nineteenth birthday, it is evening, and that quiet hour when all are gathered in the parlour and no sound is heard except the crackling of my fire which throws its cheerful light all over the walls and furniture, a pleasant scene inside, but out of doors the dreary November evening is fading into night. I feel sad, and many thoughts stir in my breast, as I think of the past year, ah, if I could, I would not write the retrospect here, many trials there have been, it has been the most eventful period of my life and probably will remain, so, but it is not for me to consider what I have felt, but how I have improved the gifts of Providence for trials are gifts as well as joys, and to me more beneficial ones, I hope tremblingly that I may have grown stronger, more perfect in the faith which is life's greatest blessing, but I feel within me the need of far, far greater strength, in looking into my heart today, I see many prevailing errours of life and thought, and there are others thrown into the shade I know, I feel every day, every hour how weak my own resolves are, unless my God supports me! But with all these thoughts mingle those of the dead and the absent. I yearn for my friend, my Valeria. If I could write to her, if I could once more see her familiar writing, even if I knew where she is, I pray constantly
that I may meet her again, sometimes I fear that if this is permitted it may be years hence, and our youth is slipping away, it is an unworthy thought that she should change in aught but to grow better, but I need her so much now, I can scarcely bear to look forward to meeting so long from now.
        I spent a few days in town last week with Mary Stevens, went in Thursday, and came out Sunday; it seemed so strange to be at leisure, and free from plans as to how I should apportion my day, I enjoyed my visit, it was very quiet and somewhat sad. Mrs. Stevens was not well, and I spent most of my time with May, she was kind and gentle but the shadow on her is dark and heavy, poor Mary, how every hope seems to have been removed, it seems to me she must live amidst sad memories and she does in a measure, but not as I would, she is an excellent disposition. I met a neice of Mr. Stevens who is visiting them, Mrs. Tucker, a widow, and in very delicate health, her two little girls were with her. Eva commenced taking music lessons today from Mrs. Delary, she is quite delighted to commence and seems anxious to improve. I think she has musical taste.
        Sunday when I came home I found that our books and piano had come. Monday as soon as school was over we commenced to unpack them. I spent that evening and the next in arranging them upon the shelves in the parlour where I thought a few months ago I should never see them stand. Father put up the shelves and fixed a lock on the door and we laid down a small carpet and arranged the furniture so that now our parlour is very comfortable and pleasant looking, something better than luxury pervades it. Yesterday evening
Father took the piano apart, it was very much out of tune, and he tried to screw it up but in doing so broke a string, fortunately it snapped near where it was fastened and by unwinding the other end Father made it as good as new. We did not dare to screw it any more for fear of breaking some more strings, and we concluded something else must be the matter, so by dint of much examination and gentle pushing and pulling Father took out the board to which the hammers are attached, dusted it thoroughly and put it back without producing any effect. At last Miss Mary observed that the short, sharp sound was caused by the fact that the hammer did not fall properly but remained in contact with the string thus preventing it's vibration. Miss Mary and Father at length discovered the screw which left the lever under the hammer in place, and to our great exultation we screwed them all till the hammers sunk properly and although there is still something else needed, the piano is now in very tolerable tune, so much better than it was before that we are quite charmed. My little charges have done quite well in school this week. Yesterday morning I was at the chest getting out some statuettes for the étagère, when Lory came to me with a petition, I knew by his face before he spoke, it commenced, "Sister Sarah, if I ask you something will you tell me yes," I said I must know what it was first, it was that he and George might go to Limerick with Uncle Jim, who was going out to get some strawberry plants. I said I could not, for Miss Mary and Eva were going away today, and that would be two days out of the week, but he promised so earnestly to study his lessons today if I would let him go that I consented, and he ran off to get Mother's consent, he and George were highly delighted, had a great deal to tell about brother
Willie when they came back, and brought a curious ear of corn from him, it is eight ears in one, small of course, but making a large group, lying close, and each separate ear quite full. Loring was true to his promise, said his lessons well this morning. We have had quite cold weather for several days, this morning it was freezing cold and quite clear, but grew dark and cloudy towards night. Mrs. Seale spent the day with us. I finished Mother's gloves today, have not knit them to fit very well. Spent the evening in sewing on some buckskin gloves which Father is experimenting on. Have not read much since I returned from town, I fear I shall not finish Cosmos this year as I hoped. Yesterday evening I read Lamartine's description of a view of Constantinople from Pera, the description is beautiful, so melodious, so graceful, it gave me great pleasure, a pleasure such as he himself describes "Calme et contemplatif" not very calm either, though free from such disturbing emotion as we have in other pleasures, a beautiful description, a fine sentiment elevates me to enthusiasm, carries me away from the common, minute realities of life onto those exalted heights which are not less real since they belong to the spirit world which shall endure forever.
        I am reading "Little Dorrit" aloud, I do not like it very much, my interest in it already begins to flag, though I am as yet only a quarter through. The wearying phraseology of the characters, the constant, recurring portraitures, produce somewhat of the effect of repetition, in my mind Dickens cannot compare with Scott.
Saturday evening, Nov. 28th.
        Oh how cold it is! I am very cold though sitting on the rug, with my
ink down on the hearth, a position I have taken both for the warmth and for the firelight. Miss Mary and Eva went in to their lesson today, though it was cold and rainy, I sent May Stevens a heliotrope cutting, and some books, she sent me out a root of the "crown imperial," when I was in Monroe we rode up to "Limerick" and got some of these and some hyacinths, she sent me the hyacinths the other day. After being cloudy and wet all day the sun came out brightly this evening, and the glow of its crimson setting still lingers in the west.
        Yesterday morning we were all joyfully excited by Mollie's arrival; Capt. Justice's little son rode her home, she does not limp at all, but is a little stiff in her shoulder which Capt. Justice thinks she will never recover from. I must take a ride the first fair day.
        Mr. J. Gordon left for Texas yesterday.
        A new courier, a Mr. Flowers, came here the other day, Wednesday, we have now two, Mr. Bilberry and Mr. Flowers, for a time we had only one, the second one who came was very anxious to go home, as he had a large family, and had left his affairs somewhat unsettled. Father used his influence to get him a furlough, and he has been absent eight days, he promised to bring Miss Mary and I some flowers on his return, entirely of his own accord.
        Father has decided to take Mrs. Willson's place ("Limerick") and Willie is there now, we expect him home tonight.
        Major Bry returned from Houston the other day with some goods; brought some calico for us at five dollars a yard, sevenpence in peace times, he did not get any shoes, they were seventy-five dollars a pair. Dr. Calderwood returned from Vicksburg yesterday, brought out some goods,
very nice shoes, at five dollars a pair; I should not be willing thus to enter into trade with the Yankees, it does not seem loyal and right to me; they have to buy with specie or Yankee paper issue, of course; these calicos we have were brought from the North, I suppose, too, but then we did not bring them thence. I have been busy all day sewing Eva's palmetto hat, but could not quite finish it before dark. I don't think these hats are very pretty for girls, but they are quite serviceable, and are all we have, this one does not quite suit me in shape, although I tried hard to make it like mine.