Wednesday, April 8th--
        It has been more than a week since I wrote any here, and yet the week has been full of events to me, we have had school only a few days out of the seven, for I have either been visiting or receiving company a great part of the time.
        Tuesday I attended a little sociable at Mrs. Dawson's, it was very pleasant indeed, we passed the evening in dancing, music and conversation, the young ladies of our circle were all there with quite a number of gentlemen for these times, there were Lieuts. Flournoy, Conrad, and Holland, Captains Martin and O'Ruke, and Dr's Cummings and Compton, besides Adam Young and Willie.
        Wednesday we all took a walk down to the Bayou, spent an hour or two sitting under the shade of a beautiful Beech tree or rambling through the surrounding woods, and returned home in time for dinner. Then the same afternoon we rode in to Mrs. Seale's and came bank by moonlight.
        Thursday, I believe, was spent quietly at home, in the afternoon Julia Compton came over and remained all night. Mother spent the day in Monroe.
        Friday morning Miss Mary and Maggie Compton and Carrie Young and Adam came over, Miss Mary and Maggie had that morning walked down from their place, after staying several hours they all, Julia included, went over to Mrs. Dawson's. In the evening I was not at all well, and lay down several hours.
 Saturday Miss Mary and I were busy nearly all day, having upstairs swept and dusted, and putting up shades and arranging the furniture in the hall, which we shall use as a summer parlour.
        Mrs. Compton had a party of young ladies and gentlemen at her house in the evenings, and invited me very cordially, but I had several reasons for declining, one was that I was not well enough to go.
        I forgot to say that Willie left us Thursday for a business journey into the back parishes.
        Monday I spent the day with a whole party of young ladies at Mrs. Seale's, the Misses Dawson, the Misses Scott, the Misses Frazier, and Miss Slack were there, besides Mrs. Seale, Mrs. Norris and Lucy, in spite of all this company there seemed to be a pretty general ennui.
        Monday night I was surprised and waked out of my sleep about half past ten or eleven o'clock by some one calling at the front door. I sat up in bed, half asleep and a little frightened, and called out Who's there? "A traveller" "What do you want" "I want to stay all night" Mother said "tell him no". I called back "You can't stay, it is too late" "But I will stay", those words were rather alarming, but fortunate for my presence of mind Mother recognised Willie's voice. I then said "Oh, Willie, I know it is you, come in". We were very much surprised to see him so soon, he said he could not buy anything, government agents had advertised for every thing, and he thought it was wrong to take it from the soldiers who need it so much, even if he could get it.
        Mary Stevens and Miss Knox spent the day with me yesterday, we had a very pleasant day indeed. Mary and I called at Mrs. Dawson's, the young ladies were at home, we found Miss Mary and Maggie Compton there,
they had just left our house about an hour or more before.
        Mother received a letter from Father last Monday, he was just on the eve of leaving for Virginia, said he would not reach Richmond before the first of May, as he had a great deal of business on the road, he said he would try and come home about the first of June, if the Yankees were away from the swamp then. It is almost impossible to cross to Vicksburg now, the Yankees have been and are still making "demonstrations" around Richmond Madison Parish.
        Father says he has been trying to get time to write to me, but has not been able to do so yet, I have not expected it, but Father is so kind, so thoughtfull, Oh, can I ever love him enough!
        I must now close this long journal, for we go into school again this morning, and I want to read some before I go.
Thursday, April 16th--
        Have been expecting Mary Stevens out all the week, but she did not come and wrote me today that she could not come next week as she was to have company.
        I have been feeling weak and sad all the time for the last few days, suppose my sadness arises partly from the state of my health, without being sick at all I find my health is less robust than it has been for a year, no wonder.
        I have received letters from several friends during the week, one from Mary Waters this evening, she says that Miss Ginnie has been in New Orleans for the last four months, that they have only heard from her once, she writes that Banks is very different from Butler, encourages every one to express their opininions, she is afraid he will convert some by his kindness. We received some papers the other day from Father,


containing Voorhee's speech, it is beautifully written, and the sentiments are noble, the language is more polished than Vallandigham's, but not more decided.
        Willie saw Johnny Davis today, he says Mr. Myrick is at Natchez, sick, is threatened with typhoid fever. I hope he will not have it, he is just on the eve of marriage to a young lady in the swamp.
Saturday, April 17th--
        We have just received a letter from Father, he was at Augusta, was quite well, and about to leave for Richmond.
        Yesterday evening Carrie Young, Virginia Dawson and I took a ride, we met Mr. Kimball a few miles from Trenton, and Carrie asked him to ride with us, he did so. Virginia and I managed it so that they should ride together all the time, except a little way from Steep Bayou, coming home, when Virginia and Carrie sang, and I rode along with Mr. K. found him quite agreeable and intelligent in conversation.
        Eva, Lory and I rode again this morning, I have commenced my morning rides again, fancy I can almost feel the improvement in my strength already.
        Willie and Mr. Axley went down in the swamp yesterday, took two negroes with them to get some corn, there was no other way of getting it, and so Willie ventured, though it is rather near the Yankees, we expect them back Monday or Wednesday.
        Yesterday John was very sick, we sent for the doctor, he said had inflammation of the bronchial tubes, he is much better today, has been running about the house all day.