Wednesday, September 2nd. 1863.
        Eva is improving, had no fever yesterday or today, we hope she can sit up a little tomorrow. We are all very busy preparing to leave, Father has been blacksmithing for the last two days as Mr. Taylor's attack proved quite serious, and we are anxious to leave at the earliest possible moment; sometimes I feel as if I cannot wait the prescribed ten days, for what may not happen before then? I am filled with forebodings. This country on this side the Mississippi is almost in a state of anarchy. We are so afraid that Willie may be conscripted before we can get off, he intends to join the army in Virginia as soon as possible but to have him conscripted and in the army here would be dreadful. Mr. Frank Garrett and Capt. Wiltz stayed here last night. Capt. Wiltz says that on Thanksgiving, a few days ago, many of the officers at Shreveport and a great many citizens went to Church, when behold! a guard surrounded the building and arrested every man as he came out! What an outrage to humanity! such we must think, though perpetrated in our own country. They were in search of conscripts. Every one is taken up now, in a few days the conscript officers may come here, Oh it is terrible to think of. Father is going to send Willie off in a day or two on a reconnoitering expedition into the swamp. We will leave
at the earliest possible day.
        A convention has just been held at Marshall, Texas, of the Governors of Texas, Louisiana, Arkansas and Missouri, the judges of the supreme court, the members of Legislature and the Generals--all the generals on this side except Magruder and one other. In this convention they have adopted some very singular resolutions, which virtually amount to the severance of these four states from the Government at Richmond. General Kirby Smith has extraordinary powers bestowed on him, powers equal to those of the President. It is feared that an attempt may be made to establish a new federation over here, if this be so we must get away as soon as possible. Oh it is dreadful, I feel like weeping over my country, what will we become! our enemies are those that are in the midst of us, with the Yankees we can cope. And yet there is a faith in me that bids me look forward to a time when I may be proud of this poor torn and bleeding country, but oh how far distant. I tremble to think of the future.
Friday, Sept. 4th.
        Willie left us this morning, I need not say how sad it was. On Father's return from Monroe yesterday he said it was not safe for Willie to remain longer, the military had returned to Monroe and he might be conscripted at any time, so hasty preparations were made last night and this mornings, and about nine o'clock his horse was packed with blankets, saddlebags, gun and tin cup and Willie dressed in his "soldier shirt" had thrown his coat over the saddle. Mr. Burke's mule was also packed and nothing remained but to say goodbye. Brandon went off gaily as is his wont. Shall I ever see him
or his rider again! Willie and Mr. Burke are going on a reconnoitering expedition as well as to keep themselves out of the way. Father has been obliged to apply for passports to cross the river, and Col. Bartelett dispatched a courier to Gen'l Abair yesterday, it will be several days before we hear whether or not we can go. Father has applied for passports for himself and four railroad employees, including of course Willie, he thinks it probable that we may get passports while they are refused to the young men, if this is the case they will join us in the swamp and go without them. If we are not permitted to go, Willie will go on to Georgia, and from there to Virginia to join the Washington artillery with John and 'Angus.' Mr. Burke will accompany him to Georgia where his family are. I do so long to be on the road, I gorget my grief at leaving home in the thought of being separated from Willie, and then it is so hard to feel that in truth we have no law.
        Eva is improving fast, she took a ride in the carriage this evening, is not yet able to sit up all day however. Mr. Bowmar Barr called here this morning, is searching for his family, left his wife at her father's in Tensas Parish, says he will be back here in about a week if he overtakes his Mother. If we get permission we shall leave here as soon as possible, we are very busy. I have made two pair of little pantelettes for John today, I never sewed so much in a day before.
        George is not at all well, has not been for several days, he had a chill yesterday and another today, Mother to going to give him quinine tomorrow. It is so dark I can not write any more.
Tuesday, Sept. 8th.
        Our passport came Sunday, but is only for Father, his family and negroes and any other persons he may wish to take who are not included in the conscription. It makes little difference, as the others can go without a passport. We shall try and leave here a week from today, Willie will join us down in the swamp. George has had four chills, but Mother gave him quinine Sunday and he has had none since, he looks very badly and, we fear, is taking the hooping cough. John has also been a little sick, but has recovered. Col. Stevens died last Thursday.
Thursday, Sept. 10th.
        I was at Tabitha Scarborough's wedding Tuesday night, she married Mr. Shields, poor girl! I fear she has not made a wise choice, the wedding was very small, no guests but Miss Sarah Garrett and myself and a few young gentlemen. I could not help feeling sad, most of the persons present had met at our fish fry at Crew lake, and Mary and Col. Stevens were there in such high spirits; poor Mary! she is so desolate, I went in to Monroe to see her yesterday evening and she called here this morning, she is so changed, her sorrow is bitter but she does not weep, she cannot; only yesterday when I accompanied her to their changed home and she looked at his portrait, she was overcome, and this morning, sitting here in this room, where we had sat so happily, she wept several times, and seemed relieved, my heart bleeds for her. It is as if she had lost two Fathers in one year, for Col. Stevens was a father to her, indeed she will miss him far more than she did her own, she says she felt it sad enough when she was left
motherless and fatherless, but never knew desolation before. Mrs. Stevens was very ill before her husband died and cannot walk now. Mary says she knows that her Aunt too will soon leave her. Mary came down with her Uncle's corpse to the burial at Monroe, she came on Monday. Oh how am I stilled blessed; I tremble lest some of mine should be taken. This trouble and uncertainty wears much upon my dear Father; I wish we were away. We have not heard from Willie yet, but expect news from him this evening. We cannot leave before next Thursday at the least, I am afraid we cannot get off then, there is so much to do to fit up the wagons, and make yokes and chains and so many other things. Mother's preparations are nearly finished except packing, and as we shall carry only necessaries this must be left till the last few days. I want to see Willie so much, tomorrow will be a week since he left us, a long week it has been. Mother and I are going to call on the bride this evening, Mrs. Shields, how strange it sounds; I feel but little inclined to go, Mary Stevens is in my heart all the time, I feel so much for her that it is almost like a grief of my own.
Saturday, Sept. 12th.
        Yesterday morning we were perfectly and delightfully surprised by Willie's return, he had been to the Mississippi. He saw no Yankees at all, says that transports are continually passing up and down the river, but never land either in Mississippi or Louisiana, he thinks we will be obliged to build a flat and ferry ourselves across in the night. Dear Willie, he is such a help to us and it is such a comfort to have him at home again, how I shall miss him when he goes to the army, but I would not keep him
back on any account. We think we shall be able to leave next Saturday, just one week from today, I hope it will not pass as slowly as the past two.
        My poor little Molly, my beautiful little pet, has the sweeney, she goes very lame and has lost her old fleetness, her shoulder is beginning to shrink and I am afraid her beauty will soon be gone; Willie's present, I have always prized her highly and she was such a perfect beauty, so spirited and fleet. Miss Mary and I took a ride yesterday evening, our horses had not been watered and Molly was very thirsty so when we arrived at Mrs. Britt's I asked them to give her some water. I held a basin for a drink from, but it did not satisfy her, and when we left I enquired the way to the well, it was about a quarter of a mile from the house and the most desolate looking place. There was a single log cabin right in the woods, several benches for tanning leather and washing, some clothes hung on lines stretched from tree to tree and the well, it had a few boards nailed up around it and two pieces of rails crossed at each end, on these the windlass rested, the bucket was a keg sawed off and there was a tub near to pour the water in, we rode up to the cabin and asked the poor, pale woman who came to the door if there was any one there who could draw some water for our horses, she said "no one but me;" of course I disclaimed any wish to have her do it, and rode back to the well. Molly must have water if I had to draw it, so draw it I must. I rode up to a log, dismounted, gave the reins and my cane to Miss Mary, drew off my gloves, threw them on a log and went to the windlass, my dress was terribly in my way and the bucket was very heavy, but I went to work with both hands, furnishing quite a laughable spectacle for Miss Mary, but when I had drawn the bucket, then
came the trouble, Railroad would not wait for me to empty it, and I could not get the rope loose and between my anxiety lest I should wet and soil my dress, and my exertions to keep Railroad from drinking from the bucket, I got into a perfect heat, but finally I emptied it into the tub and the plash of the pouring water was scarcely more agreeable to the thirsty horses than it was to me, old Railroad was selfish and impolite enough to drink the whole bucket full from Molly and I was obliged to draw another for my pet, I succeeded a little better than I had the first time, and after letting her fully quench her thirst I drew a long breath, led her to the nearest stump and mounted very quickly. The dear little thing is so ambitious, she tried to go usual, but could not keep up with Railroad's fast pace. Eva is not very well today, she looks very pale; Thursday night she had an attack of Cholera morbus, which made her lose all that she had previously gained. It is very warm this evening; we hoped to have some rain just after dinner, but it resulted in nothing but a little sprinkle.
Thursday, Sept. 17th.
        We have been packing all the week, I have nearly finished my preparations for the journey, my trunk stands packed on one side the table, the valise on the other, the bookshelves and mantelpiece are bare and so is the table, except of baskets, papers and bottles and other things to be used on the way; my desk is almost empty, only my journal book, portfolio, account book and inkstands remaining and a precious bundle of Valeria's letters which I did not put in the box with my other papers. My dear old desk must be left here, and I may never see it again, this may be the last time I shall write
upon it. I value this bureau above all my other possessions. We had hoped to be able to leave on the coming Saturday, but have not been able to get ready, we think now we shall start on Tuesday next. Mother is not well this morning, has one of her severe head aches. Father is very unwell, he has a dreadful cold in the head, but will not lie down. Yesterday we were very much surprised by the arrival of Johnny Stone, I scarcely knew him when he rode up, not that he was changed at all, but his coming was so unexpected, he came down for some sugar that Mrs. Stone left here, said they were all well.
Thursday night.
        Mrs. Phillips came down today, came to see about going with us, she wrote a note to Mother the other day, saying that she would like to go as far as Montgomery, Alabama, under Father's protection, said she had conveyance for herself and baggage, provisions, servant, and all things necessary for the journey; today it appears that she has no conveyance and but little prospect of obtaining one, I am very sorry for her, but my charity does not go far enough for me to wish for her company on the way; it may be wrong, I may judge her unkindly, but I do not, cannot like her society.
Oakland, Sept. 21st. 1863. Monday night.--
        This is the last time I shall ever date my journal from this dear home, I feel as if it were the last, though Father says we may come back, everything is packed, the wagons are drawn out in line and loaded, the furniture carried upstairs and our mattresses laid on the floor for the last night's
sleep; tomorrow (God willing) we leave, we start on our journey, we cannot foresee the end, wisely perhaps, it is hidden from us. Oh my beloved home! everything looked so beautiful in the light of the setting sun, when it next sets we shall be far away.
        It is nearly six years since we left our first Oakland, but that was nothing so sad as this, public and private grief both press upon us now; we must take up our cross, we must learn resignation.
        Eva is not at all well today, she had fever this morning and looks pale and very thin, George had a chill and fever yesterday and we have all bad colds; not in a very good condition for travelling, but I hope the journey will improve us. Poor Willie has a severe cold and was so much fatigued tonight that he retired before supper. Johnny Stone called this evening to bid us goodbye, he is going back to Texas, we are going to Georgia; I cannot judge which has chosen the best. Mr. Barr was here this evening, I sent a note to Mrs. Morancy by him. Mrs. Phillips did not come down this evening, I suppose she has concluded not to go with us.
Tuesday, Sept. 22nd. 1863.
        We have reached our first camping place, we are started. We left home this morning, at nine o'clock, and are about fourteen miles on our way. This has been an eventful day to us, we have had all kinds of adventures. When we left home we came round by Trenton to bid Mrs. Seale goodbye, and Father and Willie and Mr. Duvall went the Natchitoches road with the wagons, at the ferry Father came up with us and the first words he greeted us with were "We have broke down" it was a dreadful sound to us after all our trouble and painstaking to have broken down within three or four miles of home. Father sent us all on while he and the carpenters
remained with the broken wagon, we hope he may overtake us tomorrow night, it is very bad for us not to have him with us this first night of our long journey. We rode up to Mr. McGuire's to bid them goodbye. Old Mr. McGuire shook my hand and said "Farwell Sary, I hope you may have a safe journey." These goodbyes are sad, the saddest one today was the first. Miss Mary and I rode on ahead to tell Dr. Whyte to send some one down to the house, at Mrs. Willson's, Tabitha and Agnes came out to tell us goodbye. I felt almost overcome at leaving home and when I met Tabitha could only bow my head in her hand and cry. We stopped at Mrs. Roane's and then drove down to Major Bry's, on our way we met Emmeline, who ran from the promiscuous group of wagons, cart and negroes drawn up in the shade near the ferry, and told Mother that an officer had ordered every team not to stir till the Colonel came up. Mother was then in trouble indeed, there was Father way back on the other side the river, Willie was there too, and Mr. Duvall at the other side of the ferry seeing to the ox teams, she hastened on to take Major Bry's counsel and sent, by his negro boy, a note to Father, telling him of our trouble and begging him not to let Willie come near Monroe, for Mother's first idea was that they wanted to search the wagons to conscript Willie, in the meantime, poor little George had taken a chill and lay in Major Bry's arm chair with a fever. After about a half hour of trouble we heard that the Col. had come, and the Maj. walked up to see what was the matter, he soon returned with a very grave face, we all looked eager, he said "No use, you can't think of leaving here under two weeks, you've got to show your passport first." Now our passport was at Vienna, Father did not wish to get it until Mrs. Duvall's name was put down, and
it was delayed till Col. Bartlett went away. We were all mute in agony but Maj. Bry said "Oh I've made a mistake, you can start this evening," how glad we were! Mother immediately dispatched another messenger to Pa and we went to dinner, after dinner Loring came up with a chill, poor child! it has gone off now, but he is very cross, no wonder. We left Major Bry's at about two o'clock and came on very quietly for four or five miles, through beautiful shady woods, the greater part of the way, though at first there were some long lanes without a tree for shade. Miss Mary and I were walking our horse along quietly, the carriage following after, when all at once Zuleika commenced to kick up in front of us, Mollie kicked and stamped and Railroad plunged and reared violently. I did not know what it was until suddenly I saw and cried out "We are in a hornet's nest, ride out quick," I spoke to Mollie and the dear little creature galloped out immediately, though the hornets were on her neck, as soon as I was out of danger I looked around, Miss Mary was running frantically up the road, wringing her hands and crying out to Uncle Jim (who had stopped quite still) "drive out of the hornet's nest," and as I hurriedly galloped up, "Oh Sarah, Mollie will kick me, Mollie will kick me." All the three children were screaming, poor Loring was stung on the ear. As soon as we got a little quieted I found out that Miss Mary had been nearly thrown, that Jeff (a negro man who was with us) had caught him and she had jumped off and a hornet had stung her on the little finger. We soon applied hartshorn, and all got started again. Miss Mary and I rode slowly behind, Jeff walked by the side of us, and we talked of the disaster. Miss Mary said "Oh Jeff, I am so glad you were there" I said "It is well Jeff stayed


behind." Jeff answered, "Yes, Mistis, I am glad I was in that place, I would'nt have that horse hurt you for ten hundred thousand dollars." But it is getting dark, I have been sitting out here on this log too long, and maybe I can do something at "the camp" which is just screened from me by some bushes. We are camped in what was once an old field, it is covered with close green grass, and there are little bushes grown all around, we have seen a few pines today, I thought we should see none after we left the hills. I like horseback travelling very much thus far, do not feel much tired tonight, it is so much pleasanter than the carriage, poor Mother was very much crowded, Father had the buggy and Loring was obliged to go in the carriage. It is packed full of little things too. Eva looks very well tonight, I think the ride has improved her.
La Fourche bridge, noon. Sept. 23rd. Wednesday.
        We are at our second camp, broken down again, two wheels to fill and two tires to shrink, Last night when I went back into camp I found them preparing the beds, it was then that we felt the want of Father, everything was confused, at last by Willie's strenuous exertions the mattresses were laid down in the wagon, and Mother sent some one to make the bed without going to look at it, we put some boards across from one carriage seat to the other, laid the cushions on them, spread cloaks and blankets down, pinned shawls up at the windows and put Loring and Eva to bed in there, they had an excellent bed but Eva was tired and wanted to be quiet, & Loring was restless and hungry so they "gassed" a good deal. We all gathered round the camp fire, and heard something that made us feel very gloomy and long
more earnestly than ever for Father's presence. Willie commenced by telling us that Fox was lost, and then by degrees we learned that many of the negro men had gotten drunk in Monroe while our wagons were halted there, and among them one Jim Burke, a young negro who was formerly an excellent servant but has been rather troublesome lately; about four miles from Monroe this man was calling out for Mr. Duvall, Willie asked him what he wanted, he returned in an insolent way that he wanted to see him, Willie repeated the question and the same answer was returned. Willie then stepped up to him and said "Can't you see me, Sir!" he answered flatly that he wouldn't. Willie then picked up a stick (not knowing he was intoxicated) and knocked him several times, the negro then went away a few minutes and the others say he killed Fox; at any rate Fox has not been seen since. Mr. Duvall gave the man a pass and sent him up to Little creek where his wife is and where we were going to send for her. This occurrence made us feel very badly, we felt sorry that Fox was killed, but this was not so bad for we did not think he could stand the journey, being so old and so long used to quiet; but the act showed us with what an unstable and dangerous an element we had to deal and our minds were full of anxious forebodings. Hunger however soon reminded us of the basket of cold chicken, pork and biscuit & the doughnuts which we had prepared, and Mother and Mr. Duvall found a Cup of hot tea very refreshing, after supper we grew sleepy and went to examine our beds but then came the trouble, with the assistance of several of the servants Mother climbed up into the wagon, but looked down upon us in dismay and at once decided that that sleeping
place would not do. It was not large enough for more than one, and Mother said John would certainly tumble out, it was so ludicrous to see Mother perched up in the wagon with hardly room enough to sit upright, a most perplexed expression on her face as she thought of her sleeping apartment. Miss Mary and I climed up at the peril of our lives, and climbed down with difficulty, we all concluded amidst shouts of laughter that the wagon would not do and Mother "Oh if your Father was here he could fix it well." Poor Willie pulled out the mattresses again, laid carpets down on down on the grass and the mattresses on them, made up the beds, stretched a carpet over it all, and at last Mother, Miss Mary and I crept in, all completely dressed and with George between Miss Mary and I and John between Mother and I, we lay down, weary enough we thought to sleep anywhere, but we soon found our mistake. Willie and Dr. Duvall divided the night into two watches, each of them assisted by some old and trusty negro, the oxen were continually getting loose and the mules fighting and getting away. I could not sleep in my corsets and had to loose them, I waked a thousand times during the night, and would lie for a long time listening to the various strange and some of them funny sounds around the camp, about one o'clock when Willie's watch had commenced we heard all at once the welcome but most unexpected exclamation "Pa, is that you!" it was sure enough. Oh how glad we were, he soon crept in to our large bed and then we felt secure, the wagon came up about an hour after. This morning I crept out from my bed, fastened up my dress and went to the fire to warm, pretty soon all followed. Father and Willie looked pale and tired and so did Mother but the rest of us did very well. John seems to have fattened since we left home, he cried and struggled when first put into the carriage, but since then I have not heard
him cry once. Poor little George looks pale, but I must hasten on. Our toilet this morning was ludicrous, my first care was to secure my basket, get my comb and brush and sit down by the fire to comb my hair, which had not been loosed since the previous morning. I then procured a bason of water, washed my face and hands then rinsed my mouth and felt quite comfortable. We did not got started till late, the ox wagons went first, and started nearly an hour ahead. Miss Mary and I went first of our suite, we had a delightful ride, we soon got into the real swamp, the road was narrow, black and as hard and polished as a pavement. On each side we looked into the beautiful green woods, sparkling with the heavy dew, and the sun just risen above the horizon shone slanting through, lighting up the green, which I thought the freshest and most beautiful I ever beheld. Miss Mary and I were continually calling each other's attention to some loaning tree or son place where the am shone In long streamers over the brilliant green grass. Mollie and Railroad were both fresh and spirited, Railroad was unusually so, and Miss Mary felt rather timid on him. Mollie's lameness has entirely disappeared, I thought her a little stiff this morning and had her rubbed with the oil of spike which I brought along in my basket. But we had not ridden thus pleasantly more then two or three miles before we overtook the ox wagons, the hindermost one had stopped and there were Antony, Joe, Uncle Levi and several other negroes gathered round the wheel, consulting and shaking their heads. "What's the matter" was my first thought, my first word. "My wagon is broke down" said Antony. The carriage was close behind and as it drove up they all seemed relieved. "Call Mass William" all said, poor Mass William (Father) was troubled indeed when
he examined the wheel and saw that it needed filling, but he said it might last to La fourche, and sure enough it did. Miss Mary and I rode on, and told Willie to halt the wagons here and here we arrived about ten o'clock, we found an old, almost impassable bridge, but succeeded in getting all the wagons over except Antony's, they are all camped on this side on the bank of the sluggish, muddy stream, oxen and mules tied, separately, to tress all around and cooking going on around half a dozen different fires, our kitchen is established near the carriage just behind me. The carriage looks so funny behind, there is a cake box with doughnuts and et ceteras tied on behind, wreathed with red peppers and just on the other side is a box with Mother's Grand duke jessamine, a cutting from my "Valeria" and several heliotrope and cactus cuttings and one little violet, all living finely. I hope they will get to Georgia. I am sitting on a nice log with a tree for my back, which shaded me nicely when I first sat down, but the sun is now creeping round on my book, just opposite, on the other side the bayou is the work shop, established under the shade of a large and beautiful tree. Sandy, Alonzo, Mark, Levi and several assistants are at work, Father is superintending and more often "lending a hand," Mr. Duvall sitting on a log, his hands clasped over his knees--looking on--Willie has gone with a wagon and hands for corn. At the back of the camp there seems to be great hilarity, for joyous tones mingled with the loud guffaw come to my ears, and a little while ago the merry sound of a fiddle was heard, these are the "poor persecuted African brethren." This is our Second Camp. Here is "Lazy Pete" with two gar fish in his hands, which he has just caught in a mud hold near by, they look like alligators with the large mouths and feet like fins, and long pointed tail. Pete says "they taste like any other fish"
"boil 'em and fry 'em and bake 'em" but I don't think I should like to taste one.--Evening--We are still in camp, Father says he don't think we can leave until ten o'clock in the morning. I have just returned from a delightful gallop of several miles; Miss Mary and I had just returned from a ramble in the beautiful woods around, and Willie was about starting off for corn, I asked him where he was going, and he asked me if I wanted to go. I was glad of the opportunity and ordered Mack (my hostler) to get Mollie in a hurry. We had a delightful ride, such beautiful trees! no wonder the swampers love the swamp, but I love my hills.
Thursday morning, Sept. 24th.
        I was glad to see the dawning of the light this morning, last night we passed most miserably. In the first place Loring had a chill just at dark, and went to bed with fever, we were all comfortably established in our tent, which was nicely fixed up, and were just going to sleep when we were disturbed by a disagreement between Eva and Lory, he wanted the windows open to get air, and she was certain she would take cold if they were, we pitied them both, (poor Lory was groaning with fever) and at last persuaded him to take a place between Georgie and Miss Mary, at last we got quiet again, the camp was perfectly still, and until between one and two o'clock we did very well, but then our trouble commenced; Father woke up with a severe pain in his back, which he mistook for rheumatism, but he soon found his mistake, it grew worse and worse, and thinking it might be flatulent colic (for it had come round gradually to his stomach) Father took some peppermint, it did not relieve him, and Mother had the fire
rekindled, some water warmed, and prepared to use an injection, but found on trial that the syringe was almost useless, some time before we left home, our little mischief (John) had taken it all apart and lost some little pieces; it however gave Father some little relief from the excruciating pain, he then took some oil and afterwards an emetic, he suffered for two or three hours thus terribly and then being relieved went to sleep, it was then not far from dawn and he slept sweetly several hours; I cannot express our agony during that brief time, in which Father could not suppress his groans. I believe he and Mother both thought his life in danger, Mother feared he had inflammation of the bowels. Oh how glad I would have been to have had the advice of even the slow, calm Dr. Whyte. I could do nothing but pray in agony. When Father woke up he felt very much better and went over to direct Sandy and Lonzo about the wheel, which is now (9 o'clock) nearly finished. Father only took a cup of coffee and some buttered biscuit for breakfast and a little while after the pain commenced to return, Mother immediately gave him some peppermint, he threw off some wind from his stomach, and was relieved at once, we think it must have been colic; I know from experience what a terrible pain that is, but I cannot think why it should have commenced in the back; Cuffy, the old negro doctor says it was caused from drinking this water, and I have no doubt it was, added to the great fatigue Father had undergone for two days before. Oh, I hope we will not break down again, Father says we have the wagons too heavily loaded. Mother had John undressed and washed and his night gown put on last night, he was so well, in such a great glee that he would not go to sleep but ran out from the tent constantly, he took a
severe cold and we were uneasy about him, last night, this morning he is as full of spirits and mischief as ever. This bayou or lake water to so sickly, it makes me feel sick to look at it, the beautiful, beautiful woods and this black, rich earth are the dwelling place of malaria, the air last night was heavy with dampness, and I seemed to breathe an atmosphere laden with pestilence and death, it is indeed so. The poor man from whom Willie bought corn yesterday has in his family a proof of it, we found him sitting under a tree dressed in the cloth called "Lowells" pants and shirt only which had once been white but were dirty and all raveled and worn round the edges, bare head and feet, one leg of his pants rolled up almost to the knee, he had a most folorn air of dress and posture but his face had something of brightness in it as the setting sun fell on his red hair and thin red beard, two little boys, his children, were near, one Georgie's size, red haired and freckled face looked tolerably well, the Father said he had not had the fever but one day this year; the other, a few years older, looked badly indeed, his face and poor little bony arms were yellow as saffron and the thick fringe of black hair cut square round his forehead made his complexion look sicker and more sallow still. The Father said his family were never all well at once, he said he supposed we were moving to a healthier country, this was the "onhealthiest" in the world--
        Father has just had another paroxysm, is easier now, Willie has fixed the syringe, and they are trying what effect it will have. I am afraid Father's sickness is a more serious thing than colic, Father thinks of inflammation of the kidneys, it is so strange that it should thus die away and return--
Third camp, Boeuf river, Friday afternoon, Sept. 25th.
        Just as I finished the last sentence of the above entry Father put the tire on the new wheel, and immediately the camp was full of the bustle of yoking and hitching the oxen, harnessing the mules, saddling horses and other arrangements for moving on. The road for a few miles was, I think, through the most beautiful forest I ever beheld, large grand trees, hung with long, waving gray moss and clear of undergrowth, there is one tree I shall never forget, just by the roadside, it is a white Oak whose giant trunk divided a few feet from the roads into two branches each as large as a large tree, it's majestic branches were hung with moss, it stands out clear in my mind now, the noblest, most majestic tree I ever saw. For a mile the road was a beautiful avenue through this forest, than immediately the character of the scene changed, the large beautiful trees were still there, but around their roots the palmetto grew thick, one who has never seen it can have no conception of the effect, the scene was tropical indeed, from the forest we emerged into an open space covered thick with the glossy dark green fans of palmetto. A few miles further from here we rode up to a house on a low hill (a high one for this region) for some water and coming down through the unshaded barren field road the green wall of the forest looked beautiful in my eyes as it must have done to the most critical, there was no moss on the large live oak trees, whose leaves shone and waved in the light, they grew so thick that there was no space at all between. Willie discovered about two miles from the camp that the wheel of the North Carolina wagon was nearly broken. Father had just set the tire and wedged some of the spokes the day before; we learned that there was a blacksmith shop at Boeuf river and Willie said he thought the wheel would
last to that place. Miss Mary and I dropped behind with the carriage and buggy and rode on slowly, we stopped and walked or lay under the trees several times to let the teams get further ahead, oxen go so slowly. Father felt quite badly and had a slight return of the pain. George had a chill soon after we started, when we came to the Boeuf the wheel was taken off and Father prepared to fill it, it was than about three o'clock in the afternoon. The other wagons came down to the ford, a mile from the shop. The ford is very long, not from the width of the river, which is low now, but we have to go some distance through the current to avoid the mud. One wagon ran down in a ditch and delayed the crossing somewhat, the teams did not all got into camp and get corn until after dark, so that the breaking of the wheel was no delay. When I had taken a piece of ham and biscuit and let Mollie rest a few minutes, I took one of the men and went down to see Father, I met Prince between here and the ford who told me that Father had had another attack of pain, and was going to stay there all night. I had already provided myself with the ginger and peppermint and Mother had sent Father a biscuit, and when I heard this I turned back for a blanket. Mother said Father must come home, I rode very fast, and was indeed relieved when I found Father up and in the shop, he consented to come to the camp to spend the night, before he was ready to leave Mother came down in the buggy, she was too anxious about Father to remain here, he came home with her. Loring had taken a chill just as he reached our camping place, and had had a very high fever, but when we returned from the shop his fever had gone down, he was not entirely clear of it through the night. Father suffered much, all night he did not sleep more than half an hour
altogether, this morning Mother sent for a physician, he came said the calomel that Father took early this morning by Mr. Duvall's advice was quite right, prescribed more calomel and a mustard plaster and would return this evening, he has just left, says that Father will be able to travel by twelve o'clock tomorrow provided inflammation did not take place, as yet there is no symptom of it. Loring and George took some calomel and blue mass last night (Mr. Duvall's prescription also) and Loring has taken quinine today, neither of them has had a chill and are much better this evening. Father was too ill to travel today so we remained in camp with tent (?) pitched. Father has not been sitting up at all, has had only one paroxysm and has slept a good deal. I hope he will be improved in the morning, the Doctor pronounced it a severe fit of constipation. Miss Mary and I took a nice bath and toilet this morning, we rode down to the shop where there are some people living, carrying with us all the requisites for washing and dressing, went up to the house and made the singular request that the lady would give us a room to dress in; how strange a request it was, it did seem so then, but the more I think of it the more singular it seems to me, what would I have thought if any one told me two months ago that I should have done it, I should have laughed outright. But the lady, a very nice polite person, did not seem to think it strange, she gave us her only room, and we felt so pleasant when our toilets were completed that I am very glad I happened to think of this mode of making them; we had not undressed for three days and nights, not since we left home.
        A gentleman passed here this evening who had a slight acquaintance with Mr. Duvall, in this wise, he got mired up near Mr. Duvall's camp on the railroad once when Father was there, and they took him in camp and I
suppose helped him out of the mire, his name is Bonjurin, lives at or near Lake St. Joseph, he passed by a little way, and then having recognized Mr. Duvall who was sitting here, rode back, spoke to him, mentioned their former meeting, and asked him to tell Father to bring his family to his house, said he had plenty of house room though no other accommodation and he would assist us in any way he could, said he thought we could cross very well, he thought it would in his opinion take us about three nights to build a flat and cross, said if Father went to Natchez and applied to the Provost Marshall (Yankee) at that place (as Father had been advised to do) that we would either get full permission to cross safe, or else be forbidden entirely, in which case we would be obliged to return home immediately. It is a perilous alternative and hard to decide what to do, it seems to me that if Father is well it would be better to cross ourselves, I hate to have anything to do with the Yankees, but my judgement is weak I know in this case, and whatever Father decides will be best--
        I am so indolent and sleepy this evening, I commenced this journal early in the afternoon, and now it is growing dark, we have a very nice pretty camping place, large trees make it shady all day, and the grass grows quite thick over the ground, though just around our tent its getting a little dusty from being so constantly trodden over. If it were earlier and I felt more in a writing mood I would describe the scene before me, but as it is I have not the courage to attempt it. An observer of human nature would find much entertainment in studying this motly assemblage of natural people, some day must note a few most prominent characters, let us wait till we cross the Mississippi, the Rubicon which is to be the trial of
their fidelity.


Forth camp, near Bogue Chitto (big creek)Saturday afternoon, Sept. 26th.
        Glad was I this morning when the doctor came and pronounced Father well enough to move and the order was given to prepare immediately, all was soon ready and when we were once more in line a kind of exhilaration was felt throughout the train. Father did not sleep very well last night end Mother was up with him a great deal, but I knew nothing of it, exhausted by the two previous sleepless nights I slept almost as soon as I lay down and did not wake once, Mother aroused me about midnight to cover George. I was so sleepy, I got up and looked for the little fellow but he was no where to be seen. "My little darling" I said alarmed, "where are you" just then my eyes fell on his head, he had thrown himself quite off the mattress and his feet were outside the tent.
        Father has had no return of the pain today, but feels weak; I am not feeling so bright and energetic as I did a few days since. I suppose it is the fatigue and then I think the languor of the past summer is working itself off and must be accompanied by some bad feelings. My face is full of little pimples, and there is a fever blister on my lips, when I had the fever I cannot tell unless it were night before last when I felt quite warm. We came on today ahead of the ox team and when we had come about eleven miles, stopped at a house to get good water to drink, the old gentleman was very kind and polite, complimented Mollie before she had been two
minutes in the yard and so won my heart at once though I had been scolding her all the morning for being contrary, it was half past ten when we arrived there, Father thought he would wait for the ox teams so we all went up on the piazza and sat down, the old gentleman was very kind, talked very pleasantly and told us that one of his neighbours, a Mr. Grayson, brother of Mrs. Fleming Noble, had recently been to Natchez, that the Yankees received him very well and that he thinks they would cross. Father continues so unwell and our wagons are so very heavily loaded that I believe Father has concluded to leave the lumber here, and go to Natchez to try and get permission to cross, he will go first himself, leaving us at some convenient point away from the river. We remained at this old gentlemen's house, his name is Cole, until past two o'clock, Father took a little nap on the piazza with his head on my saddle, he refused a pillow; then Willie came up and Father's first question was, "which wagon has broken down." I expect he had been dreaming about it he was so anxious. Willie said none had broken down, but a bolt in his wagon had broken and they had replaced it by a new one which he had along. When Willie came we immediately made ready and started after watering our mules and horses, we came on to our camp here, it is a very pretty nice camping place, a level ground shaded by a perfect grove of large trees most of them oaks. I am seated on the root of one of these large trees, on my right hand is the carriage, a little behind and further off Mollie and Railroad are tied, on my left the Carolina wagon and ambulance are drawn up with some mules eating from a trough and beyond on every side the ox wagons are drawn up in a semi-circle, with the oxen tied and comfortably eating. Poor Mollie and her companion are the only ones
unfed, and here comes Uncle Jim with a tub of corn for them, I know how welcome it is, hear her low, glad neigh, and now the crunching of the corn. I am just as hungry as I can be, have not eaten a morsel since breakfast and begin to grow faint. Alice is hastening to prepare our supper. Oh here is Mack, bending under a load of fodder for our horses. I was just thinking of a lecture for him about not bringing the corn himself, but I judged him harshly, he is a good simple fellow, comes from the Georgia low country and talks that strange dialect, he is just like a child, actually plays with dolls, always has a grin on his face when we look or smile at him, he knows but little about horses but is trying to learn and is really improved. In front of my seat is quite a tableau vivant, there is the provision chest which serves us for a table, and around it are gathered continually shifting figures. Mother is permanent, she sits in her rocking chair, the same one she had at home, giving orders and receiving reports, Eva now occupies the other rocking chair, and Loring one of our old "country" chairs, George and John are standing near with some potatoes, and Father not far off directing about the tent. There is Willie with a bottle of wine in his hand, he has been up to the house yonder to get Milk, and food for the horses, and found out they had home made grape wine for two dollars a bottle. Mother has tasted it and found it good, "pure grape juice" she says, "we have found a treasure, had better get a dozen bottles," but now she says, "Oh I was just in fun," but I have just tasted it and think it very good, though it leaves a taste like persimmons in my mouth, and Mr. Duvall who has just come up says "Oh yes, it is very good!" Mr. Duvall always finds everything quite good.
    I believe I am too hungry to write any more. I am so glad that neither Lory nor George have had a chill today, Mother gave them some quinine this morning. Loring is quite well, with the exception of fever blisters, but George still looks very badly though I think he is improving.--
Fifth camp, Bayou Maçon Sunday evening, Sept. 27th.
        Sunday evening it really is, and now it seems so, as I sit down quietly in the hollows made by the roots of this gigantic tree, looking sometimes into its boughs hung with grey moss, spread out above me, sometimes down the sloping bank where the level evening light shades through other venerable gray bearded trees to the calm, clear river, green with the reflection of the thick trees and vines of the opposite bank; but this morning when we were starting and after we started I shame to say I actually forgot it, it was indeed so unlike our quiet Oakland Sabbaths, how differently our last Sunday was spent. I never rode horseback on Sunday before in my life and seldom in the carriage, when I did it was only to Church. But today we have made the longest journey we have since we started, we have come sixteen miles at the least, probably more, I really feel tired. We left camp as early as possible this morning and traveled without stopping for water or anything else until we reached Winsboro, quite a pretty little settlement with four or five white houses, a rickety looking place with the large sign "Phoenix House" swinging on a post in front, a "New Dry Goods Store" and a "Drug Store" and in the center of a small grassy common a large brick house with two stories and several chimneys, which I suppose serves
the double purpose of Court house and Church as Mr. Duvall said he heard singing there as he passed. We stopped under some large trees just this side of the town, and rested there until the teams came up, which was, I think, about two hours. Here I had time to read part of the morning service including the lessons, I enjoyed it very much indeed. When the teams came up we had some cold chicken and ham and biscuit, which were, very welcome to us hungry beings, about one o'clock we started on, and with the exception of once stopping for water, we rode steadily and quite fast to this place, Osborne's ferry on the Maçon, I was glad indeed when we reached here, and so was Mollie, poor little thing, she was so thirsty, the water at Turtle creek where we stopped at dinner was so muddy that dainty Lord Railroad would not drink it at all. It seems as if we cannot travel a single day without something breaking, nothing is actually broken today, that we know of, but at dinner time there was one tire so nearly off that Father doubted whether it would come here, it will have to be set before we go further. At the house where we stopped for water this afternoon we overtook a gentleman travelling to his home near here somewhere. Father asked him as usual about crossing the river, he said he did not know much about it but referred him to Mr. Murdock a "nice, correct gentleman" who lived at St. Joseph's town, and could tell us all about it. Now this Mr. Murdock is the same who went by our camp at Boeuf river with Mr. Bonjurin, and told Mr. Duvall that if he could do anything to assist us we must call upon him, so now we feel quite a right to do so having been recommended, and then invited by himself. How quiet is this still evening hour on the banks of
the gently lapping stream, it is refreshing to me, travel worn and weary of dust and noise; the ox teams have not yet come, and the mule wagons are up on the top of the bank and make no noise to disturb us. We passed some pines today, how beautiful and familiar they looked, there were several groups of them in one or two places, but there were no hills, everything flat, the soil looked poor, and as our road lay through the woods principally we had no means of judging of its productiveness. After leaving Winsboro the country was quite pretty though still perfectly level. We passed several nice looking houses, and the woods were very pretty, already tinged with autumn hues.
Bayou Tensas. Sept. 30th. Wednesday morning.
        Two days have passed by without my having recorded their events here, but I think I shall have time this morning to give a full account. We left Bayou Maçon about noon time Monday, having spent the morning in mending and setting the broken tire and fixing up another, and in ferrying across the Bayou, which last was of itself quite an undertaking, a few hundred yards from the Bayou we came into the swamp, as Father informed us, the great Mississippi swamp at last, from the Macon to the Tensas we came through it. I never saw anything like it before, I could have told at once that it was the swamp, instead of gigantic trees, clear of undergrowth, that we saw in the La Fourche, the growth was thick and matted with vines, everything was green except the trunks of the trees, which in some places were covered with vines but were generally marked with fine black moss defining clearly the height of the overflow, everything was rank luxuriance and looked more so under the damp murky clouds which hid the sky from our view, and
the soil, such soil, black, perfectly black and in the deep ruts the mud was black till it was steell like, and stiff as it could be, the road was narrow and very bad, one deep mud hole after another, and large roots running entirely across the road. In one place we came very near having a serious accident, we were all very close together, the buggy in front, then the carriage and Miss Mary and I on horseback, and close behind us the jersey with some of the negro women and Uncle Prince driving; a loose branch lying in the road caught in Loring's buggy wheel and this brought the whole cavalcade to a halt, for the road was too narrow to admit of one vehicle passing another, there was some trouble about getting the branch out and Uncle Prince's mules, one of which was very spirited and could not bear to be behind, grew restive and he could not hold it, they dashed up and just escaped running on the carriage wheel. Father saved it by catching them in front and could hardly restrain them, he took up a large stick and belaboured the wild one in the face before he could reduce it to any order, as soon as he loosed it, it dashed away, and we all got into a terrible entanglement. Miss Mary and I in front were making strenuous endeavours to get in the woods, for the buggy was just ahead, and Uncle Jim called out "get out of my way," while Father and Uncle Prince were making frantic efforts to hold their mules behind, and in the midst of all this, two men rode up into the melee, making it worse. At last however the ambulance drove in front, and we all followed quietly enough. Uncle Jim displayed his skill in driving, indeed the carriage would have certainly been broken but for his care and dexterity in going slowly over the roots and avoiding the mud holes and deep ruts whenever it was possible, we came
to one very bad place, it was a deep hollow where in wet weather there is a torrent I suppose, the hill looked almost perpendicular and Uncle Jim locked his wheel to drive down there. Father asked Uncle Jim did he think he could drive down there? Uncle Jim, leaning back on his seat, answered composedly and confidently "Yes Sir," he was the personification of self complacency, no emperor on his throne could have been more dignifiedly self important than this old black man with his grizzled hair and beard, his sleves rolled up and the reins in his hand, sitting firmly in his natural place and confident in his superiority as a carriage driver, he verified his promise, drove the carriage down safely (Mother and John got out) though it was a terrible strain on the mules and harness, as was the pull up on the other side. Not far on we met with another hollow something like this one At one place we caught a glimpse of a lake through the forest, I rode in where I could see it better and never shall forget the scene, a stillness as of death reigned over the green water, covered for a large space near the land with the leaves of the water lily, the cypress trees hanging over the water were draped with grey moss. silent and still, waved by no breath of passing breeze. The low muddy shore prevented my approaching nearer and it looked to me like a glimpse of another world, a world of perfect silence, deathlike stillness entirely different from the character of luxuriant life which was only a few paces distant. About four o'clock in the evening we saw through the woods a winding stream and caught Father's remark to Mother "this is the Tensas." A little further and we saw the ferry and landing place opposite, at first we thought of
camping on the other side, because we thought we would not have time to ferry over the ox teams before night, but it looked so much like rain, and Mother was so much afraid that Father would take cold that she thought it would be better to come over to this house just on the opposite bank, where no one lives but the overseer and where we could get shelter and room to change our clothes, soiled by so long a travel in the dust on the other side the Maçon. The flat was very small and we were obliged to unharness the mules from the carriages and waggons and ferry them over separately. Two soldiers and their horses and Mollie and Railroad went over first. Zulieka (Mollie's colt) would not stay in the flat, but when she saw it receding with her Mother, she was frantic to follow, and plunged into the water. I involuntarily cried out with afright when I saw her go down and commence to swim, and as she several times plunged wildly I cried "oh she is drowning, she will be killed" but she was soon safe across the narrow stream, and as she emerged from the water my fear was turned to laughter she did look so ridiculous all wet, and her tail hanging straight down behind, the water dripping at every movement. Georgie showed no anxiety about his "Feluco" but said he knew she would not drown. Poor little fellow, his only care was to get something to eat, we had none of us had anything since breakfast and George was almost famished, as we were coming over the ferry he said pitifully "Thither Mary, ain't you got a little piece of bread and meat."
        After walking up the steep bank on this side Miss Mary and I sat down on the roots of a large tree to see the carriage come over, it was quite a picturesque scene before us, there was the narrow stream, the opposite banks
covered with thick trees and vines down to the water's edge except at the landing place where the road wound up the high steep bank, on the open place near the ferry the carriage and jersey stood, and a number of negro women, further up at the turn of the road where it was over arched with trees we saw the North Carolina wagon with it's team of mules, it's high green body and cloth cover, while the flat was in the middle of the stream with it's load of people coming over. We were soon forced by fatigue and hunger to come in the house and after eating some corn bread and ham I took my book and pencil and thought I would write some, but felt too tired, and after washing our little plants, went into the room to change my dress. The ox teams were not long in coming up, and from them we learned the unwelcome intelligence that one wheel was broken. The driver had run up against a tree in a very narrow part of the road and broken every spoke. The damp murky evening soon darkened into night and with the first darkness the long threatened rain came down, Father came into the house while the others attended to the crossing of the teams, all of them were ferried over that night except three, including the broken one. It was a gloomy night, everything was confusion and wet, the black earth, moistened by the rain become sticky mud which it is almost impossible to scrape or stamp off the shoes, after poor Willie had got some supper and Mr. Duvall had taken his in our one room, which was at once bed, sitting and eating room, Miss Mary and I crept into bed with Georgie, and overcome with fatigue soon fell asleep, but I did not sleep long before I was awakened by a dull pain in my side which increased to agony, it gave me not a minutes rest for two hours, I suppose, when it lulled and I dozed a little while, then it came
on worse than before and I threw up the supper I had eaten, this waked Father and then Mother, they did everything they could think of, I took peppermint, laudanum, and number six, all without any effect on the terrible pain, the worst I have ever known. At last some hot water was procured to bathe my feet, and the pain lulled for a few hours, leaving a dreadful soreness and I was in constant terror lest it should come back, it did come back about dawn, and for several hours gave me no rest. Mother was alarmed and sent for the doctor living near here, but by the time he came her remedies had procured relief and I was entirely free from pain. He pronounced it an attack of colic, said it was probably over but advised some laxative pills and sage tea, which last I secretly determined I would not take. I tried to take the pills in preserves and then in water but could not and chewed them up at last as poor little Georgie did. I was exhausted by my sleepless night of pain and slept or dozed throughout the dull rainy day without any return of the pain. I am up this morning but feel weak and giddy, ever since breakfast I have been writing, stopping frequently to lean back and rest and smell the bay water by my side, it is so refreshing. Mrs. Morancy gave me a great present when she sent me that little bottle full. I am sitting out here on the back piazza with a wet, cloud wrapped view all around on my left. Sally is washing by the cistern, the only person near, beyond is the garden and a field from the midst of which rises the tall white-washed monument like chimney of the plantation gin and mills which used to surround it, now they are burned down, leaving only the chimney and a wreck of brick work and machinery to show where
they stood, beyond the field is girded by the green wall of woods, where I can distinguish light green willows and the taller trees of oak and other woods, for the space between us is quite narrow, but in front there is a wide field, where once luxurious crops of cotton whitened the soil which now produces a rank crop of high weeds. The horizon is bounded by the woods which look distant and dusky through the misty rain falling between us, overhead the clouds drift ceaselessly, as one grey bank drifts away another follows, showing no sign of clearing off, the house and old rickety buildings around all look muddy and wet, there is not a single bright feature in the scene.
        This house has quite a nice appearance from the outside, with it's white front and green blinds, but within it is entirely unfinished, unceiled, and unpainted and has a damp, sour smell, but we are thankful indeed for the shelter it affords, we should have been in sorrowful plight camped in the mud on the other side the bayou. Eva had had a chill since breakfast, and is now in bed with the fever. Mr. Woods, the overseer here, says we are only twenty-three miles from the Mississippi, would we were safe across, out of this swamp, which generates chill and fever, just as naturally as it produces rich woods and abundant cotton crops, and--mud! We hope to leave here tomorrow, the wheel will be finished today, it was almost done last night. We shall then go about ten miles I suppose where there is fine plantation with shelter for our stock, where we expect to remain until Father goes forward and reconnoitres the ground.
        I had almost forgot to say that Mr. Burke and Mr. O'Leary joined us Monday morning at the Maçon we were very glad to see them coming, as they
will be a great help in attending to the wagons and watching at night.