Saturday, Dec. 7th/61.--
        Father returned last night but did not bring Mrs. Aucoin with him, one of her children was taken very sick and of course she could not leave it, she wrote saying that she thought perhaps it's sickness had been sent as a warning to her not to leave her children.
        While Father was in the city he went to see a Miss Hokerno, a jewess, who once taught in Major Bry's family, she is an excellent teacher, but her salary is one thousand dollars. Wednesday was society day, we went, but there were but ten members present. Mother and I spent Thursday with Mrs. Marks.
 Mr. Pierce spent Sunday with us. Mother, Miss Mary, Willie and John expect to leave for Amite Monday.
        This evening we had a very hard rain, but not of very long duration, it is still cloudy.
        Miss Mary, Eva, Lory and I went up to Mrs. Britt's yesterday afternoon to got some yarn which her daughters were spinning for Mother, it is about a mile and a half from here and the road is through the woods all the way nearly; just after we left the public road and were walking in a little path through the woods we saw a large black snake lying before us, just accross the path, we had nearly stepped on it when Miss Mary saw it, and we all screamed and ran back to the road. After we had run a few steps we heard a gun fire behind us, but were too much frightened to stop. Mr. Drake's negro boy happened to be passing the road with a wagon and we called to him to come and kill it, we went back to show him where it was, but we found that the gun we heard was Mr. Drake's, he happened to be hunting in the neighborhood of our path, he heard us scream, and coming to the place saw the snake, shot at it, and wounded it very badly, it managed to crawl to it's hole; we were very much relieved and went on, but not as gayly as before; the children imagined that every leaf they stepped on would turn into a snake. Miss Mary and I tried to spin some at Mrs. Britt's and succeeded tolerably well considering, it was the first time. Mrs. Britt showed us some very nice cloth which she had woven; she also gave us two fine Sweet potatoes apiece, to bring home with us. Every one of her children had on homespun dresses.
        Father has received a letter from Captain Smith, Mrs. Richardson will not sell us the land.
Monday, Dec. 9th/61--
        They have all gone, they left just after dinner, poor little Georgie,
he told Mother goodbye very courageously, but when he saw her get into the carriage he hid his face in my dress and could not help shedding a few tears, these however were dried before Mother drove off by the promise of some molasses candy with "pe corns" in it.
        Even Father has gone, he was obliged to go to DeSoto one day this week and thought he had better go with Mother, so the children and I will be all alone tonight. How much I shall miss them! two whole weeks! but I shall have so much to think of that the time will pass more quickly.
Tuesday, Dec. 17th/--
        One week has passed since Mother left, and though each day has gone so quickly that I was not able to finish all I wished, yet it seems a long time since she went.
        Father has been raising the house for a week past, and I have been up to the place one every day, except one, besides this I have Rose and little Jim to keep at work, and my anxiety for the children keeps me constantly looking after them; I have had company too; Misses Puss and Hannah Day spent Saturday with me, and Miss Puss remained all night, so I had to do the honors of the house to them, I enjoyed their company very well.
        Then Sunday morning, Father was very much fatigued and after Miss Puss left he lay down on the couch and took a good nap. I brought Lory and George in the parlour and was amusing them by showing them some pictures, Eva was looking out of the window,--and she interrupted us by saying "who is that?" at the same time I heard a man's step in the hall, I did not rise, thinking that it was Mr. Pierce, but Eva, who had gone to the door, startled me by exclaiming "Captain! no, Mr"-- but before she had added the name I was at the door when to my perfect
surprise who should I see but Mr. John Green, surprised though I was, for no one was further from my thoughts, I did not feel any more flurried than if he had come by appointment. I awoke Father out of his sound sleep, and before his eyes were well open Mr. Green had grasped his hand, and Father exclaimed "Mr. John Green! I am glad to see you here, sir". Mr. Pierce entered a moment after and the conversation never flagged a moment till dinner. Now dinner is too important a matter with a young house keeper to be passed over slightingly and let me here confess that I should not have been near so well pleased with Mr. John Green's visit if I had not recollected that I had chicken for dinner; was I not profoundly grateful that when deliberating in the morning upon the subject of economising and eating cow peas, I had thought to myself and said to Alice, "You know Mr. Pierce might come to dinner today, and I should hate to have no dinner", notwithstanding that I had the rare luxury of Chicken for dinner I could not help being very anxious lest everything should not be nice, well! I sat down at the head of the table, and could not help smiling as I did so, though I have occupied the place of mistress of the house too often to feel much embarrassed in my position. I was helped to chicken, and it seemed to me that it was very insipid, I was afraid that Alice had made a mistake and my company would not relish their dinner. I knew that Mr. Pierce seldom eats more than sufficient for a bird to live on, so I turned my attention to Mr. John Green and while I listened or replied to some remark my eyes were more interested in observing the contents of his plate than in marking the lineaments of his face; but I had no cause for apprehension on this score, as he helped himself to gravy and rice he observed "Miss Sarah, camp life has not taken away my appetite". I might have answered that I perceived it had not, and
moreover, I might have added that I was heartily glad of it, but as may be conjectured I made some other reply. He looks very well indeed, I can scarcely believe that he has been through such hardships, he treated them very lightly, and spoke of them only in answer to questions. He said that it was true he had suffered one night when he was on top of a mountain with no blanket just after a snow storm. I should think so indeed.
        The Battalion to which the Blues and the Madison infantry belong is now in Richmond forming into a regiment, it is reported here that they have gone into winter quarters.
        Mrs. Marks leaves for Georgia Thursday, I am sorry she is going, she is an excellent neighbor; Father will accompany her as far as Canton so I shall have to spend two more nights alone.
        We received a letter from Mother last night, Willie has not had but one chill since he left, Mother says he is enjoying himself, I do hope this trip will improve him.
        The weather is delightful, has been ever since Mother left, last Wednesday we had a slight rain, and it turned very cold, it is warmer now.
        Father went to bed an hour ago, and I should have been asleep ere this but my multifarious duties leave me no time for writing in the day, and thought I could not let my journal go any longer.
Tuesday, Dec. 31st/1861--
        I have neglected to write in my journal for some time, but on the last day of the old year I feel that I must write.
        Mother, Miss Mary, and John returned home Friday night, the 20th; a little more than a week ago, Willie did not return until Sunday night, he has only had one chill since he came home, and that was on the same
night, caused from riding in the cold air.
        Mrs. Brantley and her son Green came down here a week ago Sunday (22nd), the old lady came to see Father on business.
        We had a very pleasant Christmas; the day after Christmas day, Miss Mary and I fixed up a little pine tree as a Christmas tree, we had no costly gifts, but a few sugar plums in lace bags, and some home made Cornucopias with two or three little wax candles made the tree very attractive to the children. Father had a few fire works too which he had forgot to bring home Christmas eve, and we were delighted looking at them.
        The negroes had a supper and dance up at the place and we all walked up to see them, Father was very much pleased to see them dance, and as their house was small and smoky so that we could not look on with any pleasure, Father had our long room cleared out and had them go in there and dance. We stayed looking at them till nine o'clock, and then walked home again.
        Mr. Pierce took all his meals here after Christmas, until Sunday when he went back to the mill again.
        Mother received a letter from Aunt Mary last week saying that she thought something of coming out this winter.
        Aunt Jane has a little daughter born on the 16th of the month.
        Mother, Eva, and I went into Monroe yesterday, called at Mrs. Steven's, Mrs. Noble's and Mrs. Roane's and dined at Major Bry's passed a very pleasant day. Aunt Jane looks very well, talks about the baby very naturally.
        Father left for Vicksburg yesterday. Mrs. Marks left for Georgia the on the 19th. George has been quite sick with a cold, is getting better
now. John has gotten very well. The weather is still delightful.
        Old Mrs. Adams and Mrs. Temple are here, I must really go in the parlour, it is the first time Mrs. Adams has ever been here.