April 2, Sunday. Such a treat! Our own dear service read by our own minister, in the old church! Such a display of mules, even those who had saved their horses were afraid to use them. Mr. Stevens lectured on Job's trials, truly his motto is, "Think and Thank."
        Moved upstairs tonight. We all have been camping out down stairs since the night of the black Yankees.
        Wednesday, April 5th. Mother, Aunt Nenna and I with Willie for driver rode over to Chelsea1 this afternoon in an ox-cart. The whole family were in the piazza to receive us, quite amused at our primitive equipage.
        Thursday, April 6. Willie drove me home to-day in the buggy, - so pleasant, the woods are beautiful with a wealth of jessamine, dog-wood and crab-apple flowers, while the air is balmy with fragrance of thousands of blossoms. The last day of Willie's stay here has been truly delightful. Tonight we sat late in the piazza, everything so lovely! I forgot there was war and bloodshed all around us.
        Saturday, April 8. Thank, God, Willie has gone! Father
and Mother spent yesterday with him at Cedar Grove, sending him on in the afternoon to The Rocks 1 for the night. Last night a squad of eight men rode up saying they were our scouts; that the Yankees had almost surrounded them at Somerset.2 You may guess our terror altho' Father and Aunt Nenna were firmly persuaded they were Yankees spying out the land. It is customary for folks to entertain the scouts, Aunt Nenna never even offered them a drink of water. The Captain actually got off his horse and told Father to listen and we would hear the drums beating at Somerset. I was listening for the drum all night (moved downstairs again); hardly closing my eyes. This morning was grateful for one thing, Willie was safe! I could think of little else. I don't think Father really believed the enemy were near until at breakfast table, looking out the window we saw two pillars of smoke rising from the direction of Somerset. It was mill day, the engine in full blast and all our remaining stock in the way of mules, wagons &c. were assembled around the door. Father wished to order Harry, who had just driven in from Cedar Grove with the only horse left us, * * * to turn back, but it was too late. From up the avenue and across the fields came two squads of bluecoats at a mad gallop, like a very whirl wind, and before we could think, the Yankees were on us! Riding around the house, some to the stables, some to the mill, they scoured the place and the house, taking all the harness except some belonging to the old buggy. They took grist and poultry, shooting down the latter about the yard.
        Richie White was with us; he was very much freightened. I had gathered all the children in my room upstairs; every time I would go near the window, he would implore me to come back. Some of these wretches had prepared themselves for plunder, having their pants' pockets below their knees. They carried off all wagons, mules and carts; cleaned the store room of all hams &c. we had hidden; knocked down all the geese they could. Our red- faced friend, who has been on every raid, was here again and distinguished himself in the pilfering line; took a box with Uncle Henry's letters. His buggy blanket
was next seized, and finished off by pocketing Willie's flute, which "would do to blow along the road," he said. The officer came upstairs making noise enough to scare all the children as he had on not only his own sword and spurs, but Uncle Henry's dragging behind him. Mother had all Father's clothes in a trunk in the entry, but he passed that by going into Mother's room. Noticed Father's tin box of papers; then to the press; Mother trembled, as the silver we were using was all hidden in her dresses, but finding no man's clothes, - with some most contemptuous expression about "her using the poor old man so badly, having so much more clothes," he left, only stopping at my room door, not coming in.
        One of the men rushed up before leaving and carried off the blanket from the boys' bed.
        The Provost Marshal tried to make Father take the oath; when he refused cursed him, and told Mother; "the men were all fools," but he "was sorry for the woman." The wretches actually carried off a towel that was hanging on the railing to dry.
        After they had gone Mother missed Laura! Such stories of Yankees carrying off little ones, our hearts sank! We sent to the negro yard hoping she may have strayed to Mauma's house, but no one had seen her; ah, the sorrow for us. So helpless; nothing to do but try and comfort Mother! Aunt Nenna's room once had a window on the piazza. When the shed-room was added, it was boarded up; the high bedstead with its curtains was put against it; the brick wall being thick, the recess of the window made a splendid hiding place for valuables from the Yankees. Mother was sitting weeping by the fire-place, when she heard a faint voice; "dem Yankee gone yet?" She thought at first she was dreaming, when the question was repeated. Soon sorrow was turned into joy. She had wandered from her haven of refuge in my room to find Mother; failing to do so, she had crept into a good place to hide, and worn out with terror and weeping, had fallen asleep!
        Hear the Yankees are en route for Pineville, where they say they are "going to give the people Hell."
        Sunday, April 9th. Here's what the Yankees did at Pooshee. Heard from Cousin Hennie this morning. The Yankees took some of their silver and all of Uncle's clothes.
 Dr. Waring has just been here; Cousin William 1 and Cousin Rene both prisoners, the former right sick. Edith and Mary Waring were driving Leize Edwards home to Stewarton when they met the Yankees, who took them prisoner, carrying them along almost to Woodlawn; then, on Edith's persistent pleadings, after taking their fine horse from them, they sent them off with an old balky animal that could hardly drag them home.
        We find out Father was saved from taking the oath by the testimony of one of the enemy, who had served as a clerk when a boy in a corner shop near George St. Judy 1 recognized him, brought him up and made him give testimony that he knew Father lived in the city, and was only a refugee, as he said.
        Eugenia and Judy have been faithful through everything.
        Monday, April 10. Another anxious night of watching. A note from Anna Cain; the Yankee army had camped in Somerset yard, burning all fences, cutting down the beautiful shrubbery in the gardens to build their boothes; killed every head of poultry, except a few turkeys that escaped; took all the meat from the store room except a few pieces; worse than all, burnt down the provision barn with all the corn and peas &c. The most of Anna's news is that a fresh party is coming up from Lewisfield. Chance, who brought the note says he met some blue-coats on the way but did not know if they were "Yankees or Scouts dress up." Dr. Waring was telling us the night the Yankees were at Hog Swamp, they took Mrs. DeHay out in the woods and tried to make her betray the scouts' hiding place in the swamp. None of their threats or bribes had any effect. They even told her if she did not tell where Dennis and his men were, they would burn her house down. She says her blood was up; she told them they could do what they pleased; that Southern women would live under the green trees rather than betray their friends.
        Wednesday, 26th April. The Yankees that visited us carried desolation to some places in the upper Parish. Mexico yard was cleaned up of everything like houses and trees, even the dwelling house was burned. Mr. Mazyck Porcher after standing and seeing his home destroyed was taken prisoner and
carried to town. Cousin William and Cousin Rene were released and returned home the Wednesday after they were taken.
        At Walnut Grove (old Mr. James Gaillard's) everything was destroyed or given to the negroes, even the ladies' clothes.
        At Blue Hole everything was thrown out of the windows. Mr. Charles Snowden who had just returned from Aiken with his family has started again for Camden. The Yankees camped one night at Eutaw devastating the place, leaving Mrs. Sinkler nothing for her next meal. On her so telling the Commissary, he had some rice mixed with sand and given her. The Yankees returned to town by the State Road, the scouts peppering them from the bushes the whole way. The next Wednesday (the 12th) a band of two hundred and fifty passed, going up to their gun-boat. The 16th was a beautiful bright Easter day. Mr. Stevens preached here to the negroes. Aunt Nenna fixed the old brick barn (the upper story) and the children dressed it with green and apple blossoms. Kate and Anne Porcher joined the folks here making the white congregation. I was too tired, could not get out; have been sick since the last Yankee visit. Pettus and his whole band of scouts passed through the yard after church, and Uncle Peter 1 and his company supped here returning through the next morning. Cousin Edwin2 died last Friday of typhoid fever, he never got over the burning of his home. (Harbin.)
        Last Sunday, (23rd April) a most exciting day. Willie and Mr. Tharin came in just before the folks came from church, it being communion Sunday. (I not being well, stayed at home with the children.) Just before dinner Uncle Peter was brought in badly wounded, his hand very much shattered and a flesh wound in his arm. His life was miraculously saved for both loads were aimed, one for his head and the other for his heart. He was talking to a man, in a friendly manner, on Cooper river, when, on riding off, he saw the man raise his gun, and aim for his head. He threw up his hand and received the whole load in it. The second shot glanced off something he had in his pocket, tearing up his clothes, passed through the
fleshy part of his arm. The Doctor has had to amputate his thumb. Laura was so terrified at the blood when Uncle Peter was brought in, she spent the day under my bed. Near dark a poor worn-out foot-sore soldier from Lee's army begged for somewhere to rest, and something to eat. The news we heard has proved too true; for sixty hours surrounded by Grant's army with nothing for man or horse to eat, Lee has surrendered! This soldier was carried to Hilton Head, and is on his road home to Sumter.
        On Sunday 25th April we heard the Yankees were coming. Uncle Peter was moved to Chelsea as being more off the road but found it was only a band of thirty men with a white flag who went up to the river to communicate with Potter; could not get over so returned this morning by the Congaree road.
        We heard last Saturday that Lincoln had been shot in the theatre, and Seward stabbed in his bed; - this news from a Herald Dr. Waring had.
        All of Uncle Peter's scouts breakfasted here. Tuesday morning, Captain Sineath dined, and the great Lieut. Pettus was here this afternoon, and I in my room, and saw none of them. Uncle Peter returned home after dinner. Father and Mother spent the morning at Cedar Grove. Between Yankees, negroes and deserters, the house has literally been stripped of everything portable. All books we had left thrown over the house.
        Cousin Henry1 came down from Aiken last week for the girls, carrying them Monday; stopped for good-bye.
        Saturday, April 29th. Saw, from my window, a foot-sore, weary looking pilgrim coming through the fields with his knapsack on his back - Uncle Edward! (Dr. Smith). The aunts so worried over our safety he had worked his way down from Pendleton. He tells us Johnston's army has disbanded - Uncle E. brought letters, one containing an extract from one of James's, the first time we have heard since he crossed the river. Mr. Mazyck Porcher has returned from the city, says the people are under an iron yoke; they are not allowed to know anything outside.
  Mr. Russell Middleton1 was dreadfully treated on refusing to take the oath.