Thursday night February 16th. Such awful news came to us that just as the table was laid and everything ready for us to enjoy our supper Father1 decided not to wait, but ordered the horses to be harnessed to the carriage, and we started on our fearful journey from Cedar Grove,2 not even taking time to carry anything with us; our terror on the road imagining we heard the Yankees' guns across the swamp. We reached Northampton about 10:00 o'clock. After a quiet night, we found many of the terrifying rumors false. Mother spent the next day at Cedar Grove, packing up and moving our more valuable goods here.
        Saturday February 18th. Nothing certain about Columbia. Father and Rene3 w ho had gone to hunt up James's4 company at Santee, returned this morning not having found the Marion Artillery. The dear old city (is) to be given up tonight at 12:00 o'clock; our army is falling back.
        Sunday February 19th. The most un-Sunday feeling Sunday I have ever past. Father and Rene started for St. Stephens Depot in hopes of finding James hearing his battalion was to
pass there some time to-day, but had hardly had time to get off the plantation, when they returned bringing James and Sinkler 5 with them.
        These boys started from Huger's Bridge to walk home; got lost and spent the whole of last night in the woods. They must have wandered over thirty miles.
        Tuesday morning, 2 A. M. February --. Too busy with my books to write last night. James and Henry Sinkler started after dinner for their company. Startled a little while ago to hear some noise under my window; my head being full of negroes and Yankees roused up Mother with the cry, "the enemy is upon us"! Just as we stood listening, a man's head appeared at the door. It was an age of terror, altho' hardly a second before we recognized James. Henry Sinkler and himself could not find their company, so came back seeing a light in my window. James had tried to attract my attention when, remembering a defective shutter, he got in.
        A Lieut. LaBorde2 from Columbia, young, handsome and pleasant spoken dined here yesterday, trying to get a horn. Charles3 turned over his riding horn to him. One squad of Southern deserters and five Georgians passed through this morning looking for their command.
        February 21st. Our news now is all rumor; no papers; no letters. All we know is picked up from soldiers passing through. They are all marching for St. Stephens, where the army is concentrating to cross the bridge.
        William,4 who returned this morning from carrying * * * Aunt Nenna's5 carriage horses says for four miles from St. Stephens depot, the roads are white with tents. An army of 10,000 men is a sight to see! Cousin Thomas6 rode over to tell us the last orders; all cotton to be burned and all negro men to go out.
James and Sinkler left after breakfast and the buggy has not yet got back.
        Aunt Nenna has been busy all day moving all her provisions into the house. * * * * The negroes seem very unwilling for the work; some of their aside speeches very incendiary. Edward, the old coachman is particularly sullen.
        Wednesday February 22nd. Anna and her father old Mr. Cain1 spent the morning. The buggy got back this morning. A note from James. Such a pitiful little note, on a slip of Confederate paper sealed with pine-gum! They expect to cross today, as the enemy have landed at Bull's Bay and are advancing rapidly. This afternoon while very busy unpacking a box in the store room to carry up stairs to hide grist in, the alarm was given that the cavalry had come to burn the cotton. I dropped everything * * * while I ran to help the work. Aunt Nenna, Mother and I helped to roll one bale down the hill. Then Aunt Nenna was as busy as anyone, cutting the bagging open before setting a fire. No one can say she is not patriotic; she gave her three horses to the government; has burnt her five bales of cotton, worth about $7,500, and tomorrow sends off six or seven of her mules to the army. Most of the negro men took to the swamp last night for fear of impressment, Edward ringleader! Such heavy guns this morning! * * * *
        Thursday, February 23 - Uncle Peter2 and his troop crossed Le Nud's Ferry to-day. Poor Neddie3 stopped here to-day on his way home, not knowing that home was desolate. Mother and home having gone, his eyes filled and his lip quivered when we told him.
        Friday, February 24th. An anxious day. This morning heard firing, nearer, much nearer than the city; also that the enemy are fighting at Monck's Corner. Cousin Edwin, 4 who has been down to reconnoitre, says the enemy have been fighting our cavalry under Captain Campbell near the canal bridge between Biggin and Monck's Corner on the Murray's Ferry Road. The right wing of skirmishers passed through Mrs.
White's1 yard at Gippy. These men are said to have marched from Bull's Bay to intercept our men at St. Stephens. We have been so intent watching for the Yankees that we mistook a party of our men, Georgians, for the enemy. Everything was ready. Rene even had his blanket ready for the swamp, when we found that they were our men, cut off from their command on their way to join them at Nelson's Ferry. We, in the joy of our hearts, gave them a good dinner; made them dry their wet clothes by the fire, filled their pockets with "goobers" and I hope sent them away content and comfortable.
        Saturday, February 25th. Jacob2 returned from St. Stephens; says our pickets have been driven in; a body of artillerymen who had been sent to meet the Yankees had returned and everything was hastening to cross the bridge. Harry 3 came down from Cedar Grove this morning; only hope he will get horse and buggy safe home. The negroes have most terrifying stories this morning; the enemy have marched through Pinopolis, and were at Wampee last night, others say they heard great whooping and yelling as if some one was driving a hundred of cattle.
        Sunday, February 26th. White Hall Essex 4 was here last night; says a negro had come from Gippy; the Yankees had shot all of Mrs. White's poultry; took her horses; tore up her clothes and threw them out of the windows to the negroes; broke up her crockery; when they could not get keys, broke up the locks. The negro says this was only the first party. When the officers came they stopped the work of devastation, till the rest of the army came.
        Monday, February 27th. Yankees at DuBois (near Bonneau's) yesterday noon, four or five in number; did nothing but carry off Mr. Harvey's saddle and bridle. Before leaving they called up the negroes and told them they were free; consequently none would go to work this morning. Father heard this from Mr. Harvey whom he met at Pooshee, where all the men left in the neighborhood met to decide what to do to save
their property from Yankee spoliation. They had quite a fright; a squad of cavalry were seen coming up the avenue, which were taken for Yankees, but were discovered to be our own men under Lieut. Bright of Edgefield, detached by Gen. Samuel W. Ferguson to come down to worry the enemy and suppress disorder among the negroes. Poor old Mr. Cain * * * started for home on the first alarm, working his way around to stop here and let us know Father was a prisoner! Father having come home the direct road had told us all the news before the old man's arrival. The enemy penetrated as far as Black Oak last night where they took prisoner one of our poor soldiers who had stopped at the Myers' for supper. They returned as they came through Wantoot. The negroes say the house there very much injured. I hear Mrs. (Catherine) White behaved very bravely, but old Mrs. Brunson, who lived with her, said so much, the Yankees threatened to put her head through the window and shoot it off! Mrs. White wrote and begged Mr. Lewis Simons, who lived near, to come to her aid. He could not leave his family, but invited General Potter (sic) to dinner; told him what his men were doing. Potter instantly sent an order for them to desist. What I most fear is not the Yankees, but the negroes, cut off from all help from across the river, and at their mercy, what will become of us? Disorder has already started. Aunt Nenna's people have all returned to their work, except Edward; the leader, I firmly believe. Bram returned this morning, but when Aunt Nenna sent him word to come to his weaving; his answer was, he wouldn't, that he was cutting wood. When she sent word he must come, he decamped and has not been heard from since.